KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 1 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
KARNATAKA  SANDHYA  SURAKSHA  SCHEME  RULES
Rule  -  1.
(1)  These  rules  may  be  called  the  Karnataka  Sandhya  Suraksha  Scheme  Rules.
(2)  They  shall  be  applicable  throughout  the  Karnataka  State.
(3)  These  rules  shall  come  into  force  on  29th  July,  2007.
(4)  Purpose.--The  purpose  of  these  rules  is  to  provide  some  relief  to  the  aged  by  providing
ﬁnancial  assistance  in  the  form  of  social  security  pension.
(5)  They  shall  apply  to  all  persons  as  deﬁned  in  Rule  6.
(6)  (1)  A  person  will  be  eligible  for  pension  of  Rs.  400/-  per  month  under  this  scheme  if  she/he
satisﬁes  the  following  conditions.--
(i)  He/she  should  be  65  years  or  more  in  age;
(ii)  The  combined  annual  income  of  the  proposed  pensioner  and  his  or  her  spouse  shall  not
exceed  Rs.  20,000/-  as  certiﬁed  by  the  local  revenue  authority;
(iii)  If  the  income  is  declared  by  beneﬁciary  himself/herself,  the  income  of  Adult  children  will  not
be  counted  for  calculation  of  the  income  of  the  proposed  social  security  pensioner;
(iv)  The  total  value  of  combined  deposits  held  by  the  pensioner  and  his  spouse  shall  not
exceeding  Rs.  10,000/-;
(v)  Such  of  the  persons  availing  of  Old  Age  Pension,  Destitute  Widow  Pension  or  Physically
Handicapped  Pension  or  any  other  form  of  pension  from  public  or  private  sources  are  not
eligible  for  this  scheme.
The  persons  who  are  destitute  and  more  than  65  years  of  age  should  be  covered  under  existing
OAP  Scheme  as  per  its  guidelines.  Only  those  cases  which  are  outside  OAP  Scheme  guidelines  but
fall  within  this  proposed  scheme  guidelines  need  to  be  covered  under  this  scheme;
(vi)  The  beneﬁciaries  under  this  scheme  will  be  chosen  from  the  following  categories.--

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 2 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
(a)  small  farmers;
(b)  marginal  farmers;
(c)  agricultural  labourers;
(d)  weavers;
(e)  ﬁshermen;
(f)  labourers  from  unorganised  sector  but  it  shall  not  applicable  to  person  covered  under  the
"Building  and  Other  Construction  Workers  (Regulation  of  Employment  and  Conditions  of
Service)  Act,  1996.
Note  1.--The  deﬁnition  of  small  farmers,  marginal  farmers,  agricultural  labourers,  weavers  and
ﬁshermen  as  already  available  in  other  schemes  in  force  shall  be  considered  for  this  purpose  also.
However  occupation  certiﬁcate  in  Form  SSY-I(B)  is  necessary  in  respect  of  weavers,  ﬁshermen  and
other  occupations  issued  by  the  Tahsildar  as  also  certiﬁcate  of  Small  Farmer,  Marginal  Farmer  and
Agricultural  labourer  as  per  existing  norms  issued  by  the  Tahsildar.
Note  2.--The  following  categories  are  included  under  the  unorganised  sector  labourers,  (a)  Hotel
labourers;  (b)  Agarbathi  workers;  (c)  Carpentary/timber  workers;  (d)  Stone  cutters;  (e)  Security
agency  workers;  (f)  Shops  and  commercial  casual  labourers;  (g)  Leather  workers;  (h)  Domestic
workers,  (i)  Vendors;  (j)  Others  to  specify.
Note  3.--"Unorganised  worker"  means  a  self-employed  worker  or  a  wage  worker  in  the  unorganised
sector  and  includes  wage  workers  in  the  organised  sector  without  any  social  security  cover.
Note  4.--"Unorganised  sector"  includes  all  unincorporated  private  enterprises  owned  by  individuals
or  household  engaged  in  the  production  and  sale  of  goods  and  services  and  operated  on  a
proprietary  or  partnership  basis  and  employing  less  than  10  persons.
(vii)  The  pensioner  has  to  declare  that  their  combined  deposits  are  not  more  than  Rs.  10,000/-.
(7)  The  amount  of  pension  will  be  Rs.  400/-  per  month  irrespective  of  the  locality  in  the  State
in  which  the  person  may  be  residing.
(8)  A  pension  under  these  rules  will  be  tenable  till  death  or  it  shall  also  cease  as  soon  as  any
circumstances  happen  which  terminate  the  eligibility  status  of  the  pensioner.
(9)  The  Tahsildar  of  the  Taluk  in  whose  jurisdiction  the  person  resides  shall  be  the  authority
competent  to  sanction  the  pension.

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 3 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
(10)  The  Tahsildar  or  his  Subordinate  Oﬃcers  shall  take  steps  to  enquiry  into  the  eligibility  of  a
beneﬁciary  for  pension  under  these  rules  in  any  of  the  following  circumstances.--
(i)  On  an  application  from  the  beneﬁciary;  or
(ii)  On  an  intimation  with  necessary  particulars  (in  Form  SSY-I)  made  by  a  member  of  the  Lok
Sabha,  Rajya  Sabha,  Legislative  Assembly,  Legislative  Council  or  a  Panchayat  President  or
the  Manager  of  a  poor  house  or  charitable  institution,  or  a  Gazetted  Government  servant
of  the  State  or  Central  Government;  or
(iii)  Suo  motu.
(11)  Applications  for  Sandhya  Suraksha  Scheme  Pension  or  an  intimation  under  Rule  10(ii)  shall
be  sent  in  duplicate  to  the  Tahsildar  of  the  Taluk  in  which  beneﬁciary  ordinarily  resides.
No  Court  fee  stamp  need  be  aﬃxed  to  the  application.  Application  forms  can  be  obtained
from  the  Taluk  Oﬃces,  Oﬃces  of  Panchayats,  Village  Oﬃcers,  Municipal  Oﬃcers  and  the
oﬃce  of  the  Corporation  of  Bangalore.  If  printed  forms  are  not  available,  the  application
may  be  submitted  in  Form  SSY-I  written  on  plain  paper.
(12)  Immediately  on  the  receipt  of  an  application  for  Sandhya  Suraksha  Scheme  Pension,  the
Tahsildar  should  furnish  to  the  applicant,  without  fail,  an  acknowledgement  in  Form  SSY-
I(A).
(13)  The  applications  or  the  information  received  under  Rule  10  shall  be  entered  by  the
Tahsildar  in  a  register  maintained  in  Form  SSY-II.
(14)  Before  enquiring  into  the  case  of  a  beneﬁciary,  the  Tahsildar  shall  verify  the  previous
entries  in  the  register  in  Form  SSY-II  to  ascertain  whether  the  case  of  the  same
beneﬁciary  has  been  already  considered  and  if  so,  how  it  has  been  disposed  of.  He  shall
then  proceed  to  verify  with  reference  to  the  date  of  birth  mentioned  in  the  Voters
Identiﬁcation  Card  issued  by  the  Election  Commission  of  India,  domicile,  residence  and
economic  condition  of  the  applicant.  For  the  purpose  of  veriﬁcation  the  Tahsildar  may
conduct  enquiries  personally  or  through  his  subordinates.  The  Enquiring  Oﬃcer  shall  not  in
any  case  be  lower  in  rank  than  a  Revenue  Inspector.  The  Enquiring  Oﬃcer  shall  personally
see  the  beneﬁciary  and  such  other  persons  as  he  considers  necessary,  to  satisfy  himself
about  the  genuineness  and  eligibility  of  the  case.  He  shall  submit  his  report  to  the
Tahsildar  with  his  speciﬁc  recommendation.  In  cases  where  action  is  initiated  otherwise
than  under  clause  (i)  of  Rule  10,  the  Enquiring  Oﬃcer  shall  complete  the  Form  SSY-I
himself  by  enquiring  the  beneﬁciary  and  obtain  his/her  signature  or  thumb  impression.

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 4 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
(15)  Veriﬁcation  of  age  will  be  done  with  reference  to  the  date  of  birth  mentioned  in  the  Voters
Identiﬁcation  Card  issued  by  the  Election  Commission  of  India.  The  Enquiring  Oﬃcer  may
also  verify  it  from  such  other  sources  as  are  available  so  as  to  be  reasonably  satisﬁed
about  the  statement  of  the  applicant.  In  cases  where  the  statement  of  the  applicant  is  not
supported  by  records  or  enquiry  reports  and  or  the  Tahsildar,  after  personal  interview,
feels  a  genuine  doubt  as  to  his  age,  he  may  call  for  the  opinion  of  the  medical  oﬃcer  of
the  nearest  Government  Hospital  or  L.F.  Dispensary  or  Primary  Health  Centre  and  then
arrive  at  his  conclusion  regarding  age.
(16)  Before  sanction,  the  Tahsildar  should  examine  all  the  applications  during  his  inspection.
(17)  After  veriﬁcation,  the  Enquiring  Oﬃcer  shall  ﬁll  up  a  report  in  Form  SSY-III  and  send  it  with
an  application  to  the  Tahsildar.  The  other  copy  of  the  application  will  be  retained  by  him.
The  Tahsildar  shall  call  for  such  further'  particulars  as  he  may  consider  necessary.  On
being  satisﬁed  regarding  the  status  of  the  applicant,  he  will  issue  the  sanction  order.  The
order  sanctioning  the  pension  will  be  communicated  monthly  on  or  before  the  10th  of
every  month  in  a  consolidated  form  to  the  Accountant  General,  the  Government  in
Revenue  Department;  the  Director  of  Social  Security  and  Pensions,  Assistant  Commissioner,
Deputy  Commissioner  and  individually  as  and  when  sanctions  are  accorded  to  the
pensioner  and  the  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer  in  Form  SSY-IV.  If  there  are  no  sanction  in  a
particular  month,  the  Tahsildar  will  forward  a  "NIL"  statement  by  10th  of  the  following
month  to  the  Accountant  General  and  others.  Such  sanctions  shall  be  communicated  by
the  Tahsildars  to  the  Village  Oﬃcers  concerned.  The  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer  and  the
Tahsildar  will  maintain  in  Form  SSY-V,  a  register  of  persons  who  have  been  sanctioned
pensions  under  these  rules,  entries  in  such  register  being  attested  personally  by  them.  The
register  kept  by  the  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer  will  serve  also  as  a  register  of  pension
payment  orders.
Persons  whose  applications  are  rejected  shall  be  informed  of  the  fact  and  the  reasons  therefor,
within  a  week  from  the  date  on  which  the  orders  of  rejection  are  passed.
(18)  Sandhya  Suraksha  Yojana  Pension  applications  shall  be  disposed  of  within  a  maximum
period  of  2  months  from  the  date  of  receipt  in  the  Taluk  Oﬃce.
(19)  The  pension  sanctioned  under  this  Scheme  will  not  be  liable  to  attachment  under  any
process  of  law.
(20)  The  Tahsildar  may  propose  the  stoppage  of  a  pension,  if  in  any  case  it  is  found  that  it
was  sanctioned  on  mistaken  grounds  or  false  information,  or  the  conditions  of  the  grant  of
pension  no  longer  exists.  Pension  shall  also  be  stopped  in  case,  the  pensioner  is  convicted
of  a  crime  involving  mortal  turpitude  The  Revenue  Inspector  and  the  Village  Accountant
will  be  responsible  for  furnishing  information  under  this  rule  in  this  behalf  without  any
delay.

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 5 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
(21)  The  Village  Accountant  of  each  village  shall  maintain  a  register  of  beneﬁciary  pensioners  for
the  village  in  Form  SSY-V.  It  shall  be  his  duty  to  intimate  in  Form  SSY-VI  to  the  Tahsildar
and  to  the  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer,  Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer,  the  death  of  the  pensioner  or  a
change  in  his/her  address.  The  Village  Register  in  Form  SSY-V  shall  be  open  to  inspection
by  Oﬃcers  of  the  Revenue  Department  (sic)  lower  in  rank  than  a  Revenue  Inspector.  It
shall  be  the  duty  of  those  oﬃcers  while  camping  in  the  village  to  verify  the  existence  of
the  pensioners  and  report  the  facts  to  the  Tahsildar  wherever  necessary.
(22)  (i)  Each  Tahsildar  shall  make,  in  respect  of  pensioners  in  his  area,  yearly  veriﬁcation  of  the
face  that  the  pensioner  is  alive  and  continued  to  be  a  eligible  person  as  prescribed  in
Rule  6.  This  veriﬁcation  shall  be  made  by  the  Tahsildar  once  in  a  year,  in  the  month
corresponding  to  the  month  in  which  the  pension  was  originally  sanctioned;  a  report
indicating  the  results  of  such  veriﬁcation  should  be  sent  to  the  Assistant  Commissioner  and
to  the  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer.  The  report  should  also  contain  the
names  and  pension  numbers  of  those  pensioners  who  are  no  longer  alive  and  those  who
have  ceased  to  be  eligible  persons.
(ii)  The  Tahsildar  should  review  the  reports  carefully  and  take  prompt  action  in  every  case  where
he  ﬁnds  that  the  conditions  for  the  grant  of  pension  no  longer  exist  or  the  pensioners  have
ceased  to  be  eligible  persons,  he  shall  cancel  the  sanction  order,  send  the  cancellation  order  to
the  pensioner  and  also  to  the  pension  disbursing  oﬃcer.  Such  orders  should  be  passed  and
communicated  to  the  disbursing  oﬃcer  by  the  end  of  the  month  following  the  month  of
veriﬁcation.
(iii)  As  soon  as  the  receipt  of  the  report  of  the  Tahsildar,  the  disbursing  oﬃcer  should  stop  the
remittances  of  pensions  in  all  cases  where  the  Tahsildar  has  reported  that  the  conditions  for  the
grant  of  pension  no  longer  exist  or  the  pensioners  have  ceased  to  be  beneﬁciary  persons.
(iv)  On  receipt  of  the  cancellation  order  passed  by  the  Tahsildar,  the  disbursing  oﬃcer  shall  stop
further  payments  to  such  persons.
(v)  On  the  bill  for  pension,  the  disbursing  oﬃcer  should  record  a  certiﬁcate  to  the  eﬀect  that  he
has  received  the  report  of  veriﬁcation  mentioned  above  in  respect  of  the  month  (to  be  speciﬁed)
and  has  taken  action  to  stop  the  payment  of  pension  in  every  case  in  which  it  has  been  reported
that  the  conditions  for  the  grant  of  pension  no  longer  exist  or  the  pensioners  have  ceased  to  be
beneﬁciary  persons
(23)  The  Tahsildar  should  conduct  a  random  sample  veriﬁcation  of  ﬁve  per  cent  of  the  cases
where  Sandhya  Suraksha  Scheme  Pension  has  been  sanctioned  more  than  a  year  prior  to
the  date  of  veriﬁcation  and  furnish  their  report  along  with  the  reports  of  their  Revenue
Inspectors  to  their  Deputy  Commissioners  by  the  15th  of  November  of  every  year.
They  should  also  ensure  the  immediate  stoppage  of  Sandhya  Suraksha  Scheme  Pension  in  all  cases
where  such  stoppage  is  called  for  under  the  provisions  of  Rule  16.
A  copy  of  the  report  of  the  Tahsildar  and  a  copy  of  the  report  of  the  Assistant  Commissioner
should  also  be  furnished  to  the  Finance  Department  of  Government  by  the  15th  November  of
every  year.

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 6 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
Simultaneously  a  copy  of  the  report  should  also  be  sent  to  the  Accountant  General,  Karnataka,
Bangalore.
(24)  The  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcers  shall  be  the  Authority  for  the  payment  of
pension.
The  pension  shall  be  payable  with  eﬀect  from  the  date  of  the  order  of  the  Sanctioning  Authority.
(25)  The  pension  shall  become  due  for  payment  only  on  the  expiry  of  the  month  to  which  it
relates.
(26)  The  pension  under  this  Scheme  is  not  commutable.
(27)  In  the  case  of  death  of  a  beneﬁciary  pensioner,  the  undrawn  pension  till  the  date  of  his
death  shall  lapse.
(28)  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  pensioner  to  intimate  any  change  of  his  address  to  the
Tahsildar  who  will,  in  turn,  advise  the  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  who
pays  the  pension.
(29)  The  amount  of  pension  shall  be  remitted  to  the  pensioner  to  his  Bank  Account  or  Post
Oﬃce  Savings  Account  from  the  Treasury  directly.
(30)  The  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  shall  arrange  the  remittance  of  pensions
not  later  than  the  fourteenth  of  every  month.  For  this  purpose  a  register  in  Form  SSY-VII
shall  be  used  and  it  will  be  kept  Taluk-wise.
(31)  The  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  shall  send  to  the  concerned  Bank
Authorities/Postal  Authorities  along  with  the  required  cheques.  Particular  case  should  be
taken  to  see  that  correct  and  complete  information  of  the  name  and  address  of  the  payee
is  given.  A  record  of  each  payment  shall  be  made  in  the  appropriate  column  of  the
register  of  pension  payment  (Form  SSY-VII).  The  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury
Oﬃcer  shall  sign  the  statement  and  initial  the  entries  in  the  register  after  carefully
comparing  the  concerned  documents.
(32)  No  remittance  shall  be  made  for  a  month  unless  the  acknowledgement  for  the  previous
month  has  been  obtained  and  a  note  to  that  eﬀect  has  been  recorded  in  the  above
register  or  till  satisfactory  proof  is  available  that  the  money  has  been  correctly  paid  to  the
pensioner  for  the  previous  month.
(33)  The  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  shall  attest  personally  all  the  entries  in

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 7 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
the  SSY  Pension  Payment  Order  Register  of  the  Treasury  Form  SSY-V.  Whenever  any
intimation  necessitating  the  correction  of  the  entries  in  the  registers  like  death  of  pension
or  change  of  address  is  received,  the  entries  should  be  made  in  the  registers  in  Forms
SSY-V  and  VII  under  attestation.
(34)  The  payee's  acknowledgements  for  every  remittance  shall  be  watched  in  the  District
Treasury/Sub-Treasury  and,  on  receipt,  shall  be  serially  arranged  and  recorded  in  the
Register  (Form  SSY-VII)  and  stamped  'cancelled'  and  retained  in  the  Treasury.  If  the  receipt
of  the  payee's  acknowledgement  is  delayed  longer  than  30  days  from  the  date  of  the
remittance  or  if  a  complaint  is  received  regarding  non-payment,  the  District  Treasury
Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  shall  forthwith  institute  necessary  enquiries  with  the  postal
authorities  and  also  cause  necessary  investigation  through  the  Revenue  Authorities.
(35)  The  Treasury  Oﬃcer  will  follow  mutatis  mutandis,  the  procedure  applicable  to  civil  pensions
for  remitting  these  pensions  by  Savings  Bank  Account  and  for  watching  the
acknowledgement  thereof.
(36)  (i)  Every  pensioner  will  be  provided  with  an  Identiﬁcation  Card  in  Form  SSY-VIII  furnishing
therein  his  marks  of  identiﬁcation,  his  passport  size  photo,  the  amount  of  pension  payable
to  him  and  the  conditions  of  pension  in  case  of  terminable  pension.  Pensioners  will  be
bound  to  produce  this  and  to  the  postman  delivering  the  money  order  or  to  the  Tahsildars
and  his  Subordinate  Oﬃcers  making  any  enquiries  in  connection  with  his  pension.  The  loss
of  this  Identiﬁcation  Card  will  entail  the  stoppage  of  pension  until  it  is  proved  to  the
satisfaction  of  the  Tahsildar  that  the  loss  was  due  to  reasons  beyond  the  control  of  the
pensioner.
(ii)  The  Tahsildar  of  the  area  in  which  the  pensioners  are  residing  should  issue  the  Identiﬁcation
Card  to  the  pensioners.
(iii)  The  pensioners  should  produce  at  their  own  cost  their  passport  size  photograph  in  triplicate
within  six  months  from  the  date,  of  sanction  of  pension.
(iv)  All  the  three  copies  of  the  photograph  shall  be  attested  by  the  Tahsildar  by  his  signature  and
the  seal  of  oﬃce.  They  shall  be  pasted  on  the  Identiﬁcation  Card  and  in  the  register  maintained  in
Form  SSY-II  in  the  Taluk  Oﬃce  and  that  maintained  in  Form  SSY-V,  under  Rule  21  of  the  SSY
Pension  rules  respectively.  The  Identiﬁcation  Card  should  be  checked  with  reference  to  the
photograph  pasted  in  the  registers  at  the  time  of  veriﬁcation  of  the  existence  of  the  pensioners
under  the  aforesaid  rule  as  well  as  Rule  22  ibid.
(v)  The  printed  forms  of  Identiﬁcation  Card  (Form  SSY-VIII)  shall  be  supplied  by  the  Director  of
Printing,  Stationery  and  Publications,  Bangalore  to  the  Tahsildars  immediately  on  receipt  of  their
indent.
(37)  All  the  acknowledgements  of  payments  shall  be  ﬁled  in  the  treasury  after  scrutinising
whether  the  payment  has  been  received  by  the  addressee.  In  the  cases  where  payment
has  been  received  by  a  person  other  than  the  addressee  and  fraud  is  suspected,  the

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 8 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
Treasury  Oﬃcer  shall  address  the  Tahsildar  to  institute  necessary  enquiries  in  the  matter.
(38)  The  amount  of  undisbursed  pension  shall  be  treated  as  abatement  of  charge  under  the
head  of  account  indicated  in  Rule  41  to  which  the  amounts  of  money  orders  issued  will  be
debited.  A  monthly  detailed  schedule  of  such  undisbursed  pensions  shall  be  forwarded  to
the  Accountant  General  by  the  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  showing  the
number  and  date  of  the  challan,  the  month  to  which  the  pension  relates  and  the  name
and  account  number  of  the  pensioners  for  necessary  adjustment  of  the  amount  to  the
expenditure  head.
(39)  In  the  case  of  a  change  of  the  address  of  the  pensioner  brought  to  the  notice  of  the
Tahsildar  either  by  the  pensioner  or  by  the  Village  Oﬃcers,  the  following  procedure  shall
be  adopted.  If  the  new  address  is  within  the  same  taluk,  the  Tahsildar  shall  carry  out  the
corrections  in  his  registers  and  also  intimate  the  necessary  details  to  the  District  Treasury
Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  for  making  necessary  corrections  in  his  oﬃce.  He  shall  also
take  steps  to  verify  whether  the  conditions  for  the  continued  grant  of  pension  exist.  If  the
new  address  lies  in  some  other  taluk  within  the  district  the  Tahsildar  shall  forthwith
intimate  the  change  of  address  to  the  other  Tahsildar  and  the  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-
Treasury  Oﬃcer.  The  former  shall  thereupon  take  steps  to  ascertain  the  existence  of  the
pensioner  with  his  taluk  and  if  the  conditions  exist  for  the  continued  grant  of  pension
make  necessary  entries  in  Register  in  the  Form  SSY-II  and  intimate  the  change  to  the
District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer,  who  shall  thereupon  mention  the  new  Taluk
in  place  of  the  old  in  the  Pension  Payment  Order  Register  of  Pensions  remitted  by  Savings
Bank  Account-Form  SSY-VII.  Further  payment  of  pension  will  not  be  made  until  the  receipt
of  the  report  of  the  Tahsildar  of  the  new  Taluk  furnishing  the  identiﬁcation  of  the
pensioner  and  his  opinion  about  the  pensioner's  continued  destitute  status.
(39-A)  (1)  In  case  a  pensioner  changes  his  residence  to  another  District  within  the  State,  the
procedure  laid  down  in  Rule  39,  in  respect  of  change  of  address  within  diﬀerent  taluks,  situated  in
the  same  District  should  be  followed  and  subject  to  the  conditions  laid  down  therein,  the  payment
of  pension  shall  be  continued  to  be  made  by  the  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  of
the  area  in  which  the  pensioner  was  residing  before  his  migration.  Immediately  on  receipt  of
intimation  of  the  change  of  address,  the  Tahsildar  shall  intimate  the  change  of  address  to  the
District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  and  the  Tahsildar  of  the  area  in  which  the  new
residence  of  the  pensioner  is  situated.  The  Tahsildar  to  whom  the  change  of  address  is  thus
communicated,  shall  immediately  the  conditions  exist  for  the  continued  grant  of  pension,  cause
necessary  entries  to  be  made  in  the  Registers  in  Forms  SSY-II  and  SSY-V  and  request  the  District
Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer,  of  the  place  where  the  pensioner  was  previously  residing  to
continue  payment  of  pension.  If  the  conditions  of  continuation  are  no  longer  satisﬁed,  he  shall
report  the  matter  to  the  Tahsildar,  immediately  for  cancellation  of  pension.  The  District  Treasury
Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  shall  record  the  change  of  address  in  the  Registers  maintained  by  him
in  Forms  SSY-V  and  SSY-VII  and  shall  resume  payment  of  pension  only  after  receipt  of  the  report
of  the  Tahsildar  of  the  new  Taluk,  furnishing  the  identiﬁcation  marks  of  the  pensioner  and  his
continued  entitlement  for  pension.

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 9 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
(2)  In  case  a  pensioner  migrates  outside  the  State,  the  payment  of  pension  shall  be  stopped
forthwith.
Note  I.--(a)  Immediately  on  receipt  of  information  of  the  death  of  a  pensioner,  the  District  Treasury
Oﬃcer  should  transmit  the  information  to  the  Accountant  General  in  the  following  form.--
(1)  Name  of  the  pensioner;
(2)  Particulars  of  the  order  in  which  payment  of  Sandhya  Suraksha  Yojana  Pension  was
sanctioned:
(i)  Designation  of  the  Oﬃcer  who  issued  the  sanction  order;
(ii)  Number  and  date  of  the  order.
(3)  Date  of  death  of  the  pensioner
(b)  The  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer  shall  also  certify  in  the  said  form  that  necessary  entries  have
been  made  in  the  check  register  of  SSY  Pension  payments  prescribed  Rules  21  and  31  and  that
the  unwanted  monthly  payment  pages  in  the  register  have  also  been  scored  out.
Note  II.--The  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer  should  necessarily  send  to  the  Accountant  Genera)  a  report  of
deaths  of  SSY  Pensioners.  Such  reports  should  be  sent  by  the  15th  of  the  month  following  the
month  for  which  the  report  is  sent.  For  the  months  for  which  no  deaths  of  pensioners  are  reported
to  him  by  the  oﬃcers  concerned,  a  "NIL"  report  should  be  sent  to  the  Accountant  General,
Karnataka,  Bangalore.
(40)  On  receipt  of  intimation  of  the  death  of  a  pensioner,  the  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-
Treasury  Oﬃcer  shall  take  steps  to  have  necessary  entries  made  in  his  registers  in  Forms
SSY-V  and  SSY-VII  and  to  stop  further  remittances.
(41)  The  expenditure  on  the  SSY  Pension  Scheme  shall  be  debited  to  the  new  head  "SSY"
Scheme  under:
2235
- Social Security and Welfare.
60
- Other Social Security Welfare Programmes.
001-0-02
- New Social Security.
059
- Other expenditure.
(42)  Government  may  at  any  time  suspend,  revoke  or  discontinue  the  SSY  Pension  Scheme  or
restrict  sanctions  depending  on  the  availability  of  funds.
(43)  Government  reserve  to  themselves  the  power  to  recover  the  amount  of  SSY  Pension  drawn
by  any  person  on  the  basis  of  any  declaration  which  is  later  found  to  be  not  true.

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 10 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
(44)  (a)  If  any  applicant  for  the  grant  of  SSY  Pension  gives  false  information  regarding  his  or
her  income  and  other  particulars  prescribed  in  the  application  with  a  fraudulent  and
dishonest  intention  to  induce  the  oﬃcial  to  sanction  pension,  criminal  complaints  can  be
lodged  against  him  or  her  for  an  oﬀence  of  cheating.
(b)  The  SSY  Pension  paid  to  the  persons  can  also  be  recovered  by  ﬁling  a  suit  However,  before
ﬁling  a  suit  it  has  to  be  veriﬁed  whether  the  persons  who  have  obtained  SSY  Pension  possess  any
property  so  as  to  realise  the  decree  amount  if  decree  is  obtained  against  them.
(c)  The  Administrative  Department  shall  also  take  disciplinary  action  against  the  oﬃcials  who  have
recommended  the  SSY  Pension  cases  in  respect  of  such  applicants  without  making  proper  enquiry
as  provided  for  in  these  rules.
FORM  SSY-I
[Rule  11]
Application  for  Sandhya  Suraksha  Yojana  Pension
District  :.....................................................
Taluk:  ..................................
Village:......................................................
Town:  .........................................
1. Name of the applicant
2. Male or Female
3. Name of the father or husband
4. Full Postal Address:
(a) Temporary Address:
(b) Permanent Address:
5. Age (Age on the date of application) (Proofs for the stated age
enclosed/not enclosed. If enclosed, whether they are original or copies)
6. Identiﬁcation Marks:
1.
2.
7. Details of the applicant's relatives and their ages:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
8. The annual income of the applicant and his/her spouse
9. The deposits held by the applicant and his/her spouse
(a) Amount
(b) In what Form
(c) Where (Institution)
10. Whether availing old age pension/widow pension/physically
handicapped pension or any other form of pension from public or
private sources. If yes, give details
11. Occupation held by the applicant. Whether the occupation
certiﬁcate in - Form SSY-I(B) is enclosed
12. List of documents enclosed:
1. Age Certiﬁcate
2. Occupational Certiﬁcate
3. Domicile Certiﬁcate
4. Aﬃdavit of deposit of income
All  particulars  furnished  by  me  are  correct  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge.  If  any  information

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 11 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
furnished  by  me  is  found  at  any  time  to  be  not  true,  I  hereby  undertake  to  repay  to  Government
the  pension  drawn  by  me.
Place: .......
Date: ........
Signature of the applicant
or left thumb impression
FORM  SSY-I  (A)
[Rule  12]
Acknowledgement  Form
Oﬃce  of  the  Tahsildar…..........  Taluk  ….........  Received  on  …....  the  application  of  Sri/Smt.
….........................  for  Sandhya  Suraksha  Yojana  Pension.
Place:…......
Date:….......
Signature:….........
Designation:….......
FORM  SSY-I  (B)
[Note  1  under  Rule  6(1)]
Occupation  Certiﬁcate
This  is  to  certify  that  Sri/Smt.......................  Son/husband  of  ..........  residing  at  No.
........................................  is  working  as  ............  for  the  past  ...........years.
He/she  is  aged  about.............years.
Place:.........
Date:..........
Signature of the Tahsildar
............Taluk
FORM  SSY-II
[Rule  13]
Register  of  Applications  for  Sandhya  Suraksha  Yojana  Pension
Taluk:…............
District:…......

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 12 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
Sl.
No.
Name of the
applicant and
name of
father/
husband
Full
Address
Name and full
address of
guardian,
institution, if
any
If it is a
cast Under
Rule 10(ii)
or (iii), the
details
Date of
receipt of the
application
Date of
forwarding the
application for
enquiry
(1) (2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Date of report
of the
Enquiring
Oﬃcer
Date of forwarding
the application to
the Sanctioning
Authority
Substance of the
recommendation
Order of
sanctioning
authority and
reference number
Date and
number of the
Pension
Payment
Order
Remarks
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(13)
(13)
FORM  SSY-III
[Rule  11]
Report  of  the  Enquiring  Oﬃcer
I  have  made  necessary  enquiries  as  required  in  the  SSY  rules  and  submit  the  following  report.—
1. What is the age of applicant on the date of enquiry
2. What is the total income of applicant
(i) Wages Rs. Monthly
(ii) Building rent Rs. …......annually
(iii) Landed property income Rs. …... annually
(iv) Interest on deposits Rs. …... annually
(v) Family pension Rs. ….......annually
(vi) Any other source Rs. …..annually
(vii) Total annual family income Rs. ….
3. Whether he/she gets
(i) Old Age Pension
(ii) Widow Pension
(iii) Physically Handicapped Pension
(iv) Devdasi Pension
(v) PPF/LI linked Pension
(vi) Family Pension
(vii) Lands owned: extent…..Income Rs. …....
(viii) House rent Rs. …........
4. Is he/she resident of Karnataka since 10 years:
Has he/she enclosed domicile certiﬁcate
5. * This is the ﬁrst/second/third application of the applicant.
The orders passed on the previous applications are.
6. What is his/her current occupation
Enclose proof of occupation
7. Is He/she residing in the given address Is it correct
Give the full postal address with Pin Code
8. Has he/she enclosed four passport size-photographs
…......
9. Mahazar of local enquiry signed by
Panchayat/Municipal Member of the
area and its Secretary/CO should be enclosed
10. Do you recommend SSY Pension.........

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 13 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
Place:….......
Date:…........
Signature and Designation of
the Enquiring Oﬃcer
I  certify  that  I  have  veriﬁed  and  ﬁnd  the  details  furnished  by  the  Enquiring  Oﬃcer  as  above  are
satisfactory  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  belief.
Place:…........
Date:….........
Signature of the
Tahsildar
FORM  SSY-IV
[Rule  17]
Oﬃce  of  the  Tahsildar,
.........Taluk
Subject:  Grant  of  Sandhya  Suraksha  Yojana  Pension  to  Sri/Smt.  ..........
Order  No.  .............
Dated:...............
With  reference  to  the  Report  No...........,  dated.............of  the  Enquiring  Oﬃcer,  .........  Hobli,  .........
Taluk  ..........  on  the  subject  mentioned  above  sanction  is  accorded  to  the  payment  of  Sandhya
Suraksha  Yojana  Pension  of  Rs.  ........(Rupees...........only)  per  mensem  to  the  person  mentioned
below  with  eﬀect  from  the  date  of  this  order  till  his/her  death  or  upto  cancellation  whichever  is
earlier.
Address: Sri/Smt.
.................................
.................................
.................................
.................................
(1)  Payment  shall  be  made  by  the  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer/Sub-Treasury  Oﬃcer  to  the  Post
Oﬃce
 Savings
 Bank
 Account
 or
 Deposit
 directly
 to
 the
 Bank
 Account
 of
 the
beneﬁciary...........
(2)  The  pensioner/payee  should  intimate  any  change  of  address  at  any  time  to  the
Tahsildar...........without  delay.  Delay  will  result  in  the  payment  of  pension  being
postponed.
(3)  This  order  is  liable  to  cancellation  if  it  is  found  that  the  pension  was  sanctioned  on  mistaken
grounds  or  on  false  information  furnished  by  the  person  of  Enquiry  Oﬃcer.
To
Tahsildar
…..........

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 14 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
Taluk
The  District  Treasury  Oﬃcer…....
Copy  to:
The  Deputy  Commissioner…............
The  pensioner/payee…......................
The  Village  Accountant…..................
FORM  SSY-V
[Rules  17  and  21]
Register  of  Pension  Payment  Order's  of  Sandhya  Suraksha  Yojane  Pensions
Taluk .
District
Sl.
No.
Name of
the
pensioner
with full
address
Name and
full
address of
institution,
if any
where
he/she
resides
Pension
payment
order
Number
and date
Eﬀective from
Amount
of
pension
Date of Dated
initials
of
oﬃcial
in
charge
Remarks
Month
Year
expiry
of
pension
(1)
(2)
(2a)
(3)
(4a)
(4b)
(5)
(6)
(7
(8)
*  To  be  ﬁlled  up  in  red  ink
Enter  the  name  of  Institution  here  if  the  pensioner  is  an  inmate  of  a  poor  house
FORM  SSY-VI
[Rule  21]
Form  of  intimation  of  death/change  of  address,  etc.,  of  Sandhya  Suraksha  Yojana  Pensioner
District:...................
Taluk:  ..............
Village/Town:................
(1)  Sri/Smt......................Tension  No.  ..............died  on  the..................  day  of...............200...

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 15 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
(2)  Sri/Smt.  .................Pension  No.  ................has  changed  his/her  address  as  follows:
.........................
(3)  Sri/Smt.................Pension  No.  ........................has  left  the  village.
His/her  address  after  leaving  the  village  is............not  known.
(4)  Sri/Smt  ...............................  is  no  longer  an  inmate  of  ...............
His/her  SSY  Pension  should  be  stopped  with  eﬀect  from  (month)........year.
Place:  ...............
Date:  ...............
Seal.
Signature  of  the  Village  Accountant
(*  Strike  out  whichever  is  not  applicable)
FORM  SSY-VII
[Rules  30  and  31]
Check  Register  of  Pension  Payment
1.
Serial Number
2.
Order Number and date under which
pension is sanctioned
3.
Name of the pensioner
4.
Full address
5.
Name and full address of
guardian/Institution, if any
6.
Amount of pension (in ﬁgures and
words)
7.
Date from which pension commences
8.
Change in address, if any
9.
Date o f expiry of pension
10.
Other remarks
Dated:…...........
Signature of the Treasury Oﬃcer
Space  for  aﬃxing  specimen  signature  slip  of  pensioner.
Space  for  keeping  notes  regarding  the  reports  received  from  the  Tahsildar,  regarding  existence  and
condition  of  the  Sandhya  Suraksha  Scheme  Pensioner.

KARNATAKA SANDHYA SURAKSHA SCHEME RULES
 (Page 16 of 16)
Printed For: 22-11-2025 at 07:29:PM
FORM  SSY-VIII
[Rule  36]
Government  of  Karnataka
Sandhya  Suraksha  Scheme
Identiﬁcation  Card
1. Name and address of the Pensioner :
2. Number and date of the order sanctioning the pension :
3. Amount of pension :
Rs.
In words Rupees
4. Period upto which the pension is payable :
Identiﬁcation marks:
(1)
(2)
Signature/thumb impression of the Pensioner
Signature of the Tahsildar.
