No. 20 of 1959
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Short title, extent and commencement.
Constitution of Board of Reven~e.
Principal seat and other places of sittiugs of Board of Revenue.
Conditiom of service of members of Board.
Power~ of superintendence of Board.
Exercise of juri5diction by single members and benches.
Cases pending at commencement of Code.
Revenue Officers, their Classes and Powers
Control over Revenue Officers.
Power to aller, create or abolish divi~ions, districts, suh-divisioru
Power to appoint Commissioners of divisions.
Power to appoint Additional Commissioner.
Power to appoint Collr-ctor.
Power to appoint Additional Collectors,
Appointment and powers of t\ >sistan t Collectors and Deputy
Appointment of Tahsildars, Additional Tahsildars and
Appointment of Superintendents of Land Records and Assistant
Superintendents of Land Records.
Suborrlination of Revenue Officers.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Conferral by State Govanme r,;
Powers of Revenue Officers
on Offiical and other persons.
Powers o:,:o:rcisable 0;1 transfer.
C:olJector in case of temporary vancancy.
Procedure of Reve.oue Officers aod Revenue Court&.
Place for holding enquiries.
Power to enter upo11 and survey land.
Power to transfer cases.
Pow!'r to tr;c,1sk; c:,ocs tu t-,d from ~Ltbor<li.iwle&.
(:,qlf'rrnl 1,,'" S.-: .. ,,,, of Courts n.n Ef,a·d an<l Revenue Oilic,::rs.
Powers of Revenue Officers to require attendance of persons and
production of documents and to receive evidence.
Compelling attendanc.e of witness.
Hearing in absence of party.
Po,yer to "-1>.-ard cost~.
11a,l'ler of cox,;:,cuting orde:- 10 ddiver :iossessir_,,1 of lmrnoy;.ble
Persons by \1 horn :tpn..--·ranu:s ~ud applications rn<.1y be made before 242
a;,J to Revenne Office~,.
Effect of rulrs it Schedule I.
Orders of Rcv,:nue Officer when reversible by reason of error or
Code of Civil Proce(lurc to apply when no expres~ provision made
Appeal, Revis~on and Review
.-\ppeal ;-md :-:.ppellate .-nthoritics.
"! ril.mfcr of certai;1 pcndin{:\" pruceedings to Settlement Commissioner. 244
Copy of order objected to accompany petitio.n.
Power of appellate authority.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Stay of execution of order!.
Application of Limitation Act.
Land and Land Revenue
State ownership in .all land~-
Liability of land to payment of land revenue.
Certain land tn be exempted from payment of land revenue.
Variation of land revenue .?.ccording to purpose for which land is used.
59.-B. Reassc~sment on diYersion of land prior to comi:r..g into fore
Assessment by whom to be fixed.
Revenue Survey and Settlemen ,n Non.urban Areas
A-- -.Application of Chapters and Officeri
Application of this Chapter to lands in 'non-urban area5_
Appointmcn t of Additional Settleme'lt Commissioner and their powers and
Appointment of Settlement, Deputy Settlement and Assistant Settlement
Powers of Settlement Deputy Settlement and Assi~tant Settlement Officen.
Definitions of revenue survey.
67. :'\otification of proposed revenue survey.
Formation of survey numbers and villages.
Separate demarcat:on of land diverted or specially assigned.
Power to renumber or SuU-<livide survey numbers.
Entry of surv~v numbers and sub-divisions in rr;cord~.
Dnermination of abadi of village.
Power of Settlement Officer to divide or unit(: villages or exclude area
THE MA(>HYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
C-Se l!ement qf rent
Fixation of assessment rates.
Maximum and minimum limits for the rate of assessment.
Fixation of fair asses~mcnt.
All Iand5 liable to asscs,rne:1t.
Remission of enhanct'ment to Bhumiswami who relinquishes.
Power of Collector to complete uIJfini,hed proceedings.
Inquiry into profits of agriculture and value ofland
Power to transfer duty of maintaining maps
and records to Settlement.
Power of Suh-Divisional Offier to correct errors.
Power of Collector during term of Sellkmcnt etc.
Power to grant power of Settlement Officer during term of SettlerncnL. 255
Power to make rules.
Assessment and Re-Assessment of Land in Urban areas
Provisions of Chapter to apply to land in urban areas.
Powers of Collector to divide lands into pl0t numbers.
Powers of Collector to renumber
or sub-divide plot numbers.
·Area and assessment of plot numbers and sub-divisions to be entered 255
Area in town formed into blocks for assessment.
Collector to fix standard rate of
Fixa.tion of standard rates of as~essment.
Maximum and minimum limits for the rate of assessmeut.
Collector to assess plot at rate prescribed.
Assessment fixed sh,lll be land revenue or rent.
Land reveaue or rent fixed under previous settlement or leases to 257
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
Formation of patwaris'circles and appointmentof patwari~thereto·.
Formation of revenue inspectors circles,
Appointment of revenue inspectors, etc.
Acquisition of rights to be reported.
Mutation of acqiusition of right in Field Book and other relevan.t
lll. Jurisdiction of Civil Courts.
Intimation of transfers by Registering Officers.
Correction of clerical errors.
l 14A. Bhoo Adhikar Avam Rin Pustika.
wrong entry in Khasra and any other land record.5 by 260
Disputes regarding entry in khasm or in any other land record,.
Presumption as to entries m 1.-md records.
Obligation to furnish information as to title.
Penalty fo, neglect to furnish informatior,.
Requisition of as;iista.11.ce in preparation of maps and record of right'!'.
Power to make rules fo, land records.
Exemption from provisions of this chapter.
Record-of-right~ at commencement of Code.
Boupdades and Boundary :Marks, Survey Marks
Construction of boundary marks of villages and survey numbcn; or
12,  Disputes regarding 'boundaries between villages, survey numbers an~ 26'
~jectment of persons wr~gfully in po.~session.
Demarcation and maintenance of bt?undary lines.
Enforcement ,of repair of boundary or survey marks.
Demarcation of boundaries of survey number or snb-div:ision or plot 262
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Penalty for destnlction, injury or removal of boundary or survey
Rights of way· anrl. other private casements.
Penalty for obstruction of way,
Execution of bond for abstaining from repetition of certain acts,
Acquisition of land for road, paths, etc.
Power to exempt from operation of this Chapter.
RCalisation of Land Revenue
137. Land revenue first charge on land.
Responsibility for payment of land revenue.
Land revenue recoverable from any person, in possession.
Dates on which land revenue falls due and is payable.
Definitions of "arrear" and '·defaulter."
Patel, Patwari, Gram Sabha or Gram Panchayat bound to give receipt. 264
Penalty for default of payment of land revenue,
Remission or suspension of land revenue on failure of crops.
Certified account to be evidence as to arrear and de£aulter.
Process for recovery of arrear,
Costs recoverable as part of arrear.
Enforcement of processes in other districts.
Payment under protest and suit for recovery.
151. Application of proceeds of sale.
Land sold for arrears to be free from encumbrances.
Purchaser not liable for land revenue due prior to sale.
i54-A Powers of the Tahsildar to let out the holding in respect of which 266
arrear is due or any other holding of the defaulter.
!55. Moneys recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.
Recovery of moneys from surety.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE,. r,"
Land revenue payable by Bhumiswamis.
Revocation of exemption from liability for land revenue,
Reduction of revenue during the currency of se-ttlement.
Pendiug applications for conferral of Bhumiswami ngi:t,.
Forfeiture in cases of certain transfers.
Avoidance of transfer in contravention of section 165.
170-A. Certain transfers to be set aside,
170-B. Reversion of land of members of original tribe which was
I 70-C. Advocate not to appear in proceedings under section 170-A or 170-B
170-D. Second appeal barred.
171. Right to make improvements.
Disposal of relinquished sub-division.
Right of way to relinquished land.
Righls to trees in holding.
R~triction on transfer of tree!,
Goverenment LeHees and Service Land
Rights and liabilities of a Government lesree.
1'llf MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVFNUE CODE, !'15'
Disposal of service land in Sironj Region when services no longer
Re»mnptioJl by Blmmiswami in certain ca~ei..
Conferral of Bhurniswami rights on ocrnpancy tenants.
Restoration of occupancy tenant.
Dtvolution of rights of occupancy temmts.
Provisions applicable to occupancy tenant whose tenancy 1s
Occupancy tenant's rights or transfer.
Right of occupancy tenant to make improvement.
Right of certain persons to apply to set aside transfers by occupancy
Penalty for failure: to give receipt or for excess recovery.
Remission and suspension of rent consequent on like tratemcnt
Reinstateme11t of wrongfuliy ejected occupancy tenant.
Power to make assessment and decide disputes.
Initiation of consolidation proceedings.
TI!ll MADH'iA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Preparation of scheme for consolidation of holdings.
Right of Bh11miswamis to possession of holdings.
Transfer of rights of Bhumiswamis in holdings,
214. ~o instrument necessary to effect transfer.
Costs of carrying out scheme.
Recovery of compensation and costs.
Suspension of partition proceedings during currency of
Transfer of property during proceedings.
Rights of Bhumiswamis after consolidation same as Lefore.
Power to make rules.
Dnties imposed under any law upon land holders dee:ned to be
Appointment of substitute patel.
Entrustment of village management.
Appointment of kotwars and their d11ti~.
C - Gram Sabha
Rights in Abadi and Unoccupied Land and Its Prodaee
Rl!.::ord of wioccupied land.
Preparation of Nfatar Patrak.
THE MADHYA PRADESH. LAND 'U· Vi'NUF CODE, 1959
Matters to be provided for in Nistar Patrak.
Provision in Nistar Patrak for certaiu matters.
Collector to set apart land for exercise of Ni.star rights.
Rights in waste land of another village.
Rights in fruit bearing trees planted in unoccupied land.
Prohibition of cutting of certain trees.
Measures to prevent theft of timber from Government forest.
Dispoial of abadi sites.
Rights to hold house site free of land revenue.
Right of persons holding house sites in abadi.
Government's title to minerals.
Penalty for unauthorisedly taking possession of land.
Regulation of fishing, hunting, etc.
Reinstatement of Bhumiswami improperly dispossessed.
250-A. Confinement in civi prison on failure to restore possession
under sec ti on 250.
Vesting of tanks in State Government.
Maintenance of works of public utility.
Punishment for contravention of provisiom.
Performance of duties of Gram Sabha by Patel.
Prescription of standards of cultivation and management.
1nspection and copies of maps and land records.
Exclusive jurisdiction of revenue authorities.
257-A. Rurden of proof 21.Jld bar of legal practitioners in certain
G:nera.l rule ma.king powtr.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Reference to certain tenures.
Reference to laws not in force in any region.
Power to remove difficulties.
Code no( to apply in certain cases.
Short title, c:iw:nt and
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
(No. 20 of 1959) 1
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
(R!eceiv~d the. ass~nt ~: the President on the 15 tl1 September, 1959; assent first
lvfadhya Pradesh Gazette" extraordinary on the 21st
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to land rr.venue
of Revnue Officers, right~ and liabilities of holders of land fro~ tJ1c' State
Government agricultural tenures and other matters rea1ting to land :cind the
liabilities i'lciden ta1 there to in 11adh:ya Pradesh.
Be it enacted by the ::\fadhya Pradesh Legislature in the Tenth Year of
the Republic of India as
(I) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue
It extends to the whole of 1'.Iadhya Pradeslt but nothing in this Code
shall apply to such ar..::as as may, from time to t.ime, be constituted as reserved
or protected forests under the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (XVI of 1927).
This Code shall come into force on such date 2 as the State Govern~
(I) In this Code, unless there is anything repugnant to the subject
the area reserved from time to time in a
village in a non-urban area for th~ r~idcncc of the inhabi-
tants thereof or for purposes ancillary thereto, and any
other local eq Lti valcrn of thi~ expression such as "village
site" or "gaons than" shaH also he construed accordingly;
the raising of anaual or periodical crops inclnding
hctd leaves (Pan) and waternitls (Singhara) and gar-
h or ticul ture ;
the planting and upkeep of orchards; and
the reserving of laad for fodder, grazing 01" thatch
"agricultural year" means the year commencing on the
fir~ t day of J 111 y or such other date as the State Government
may, by notification, appoint;
"Board" !Il.t".ans the Board of Revenue constituted under
For Statemmt of Objects nnd Reasons ( in En!!li;h) s~ Madhya Pradesh Gazette Extra
ordinary dated the 1st fuly, 1958 page II 36 and ( in Hindi} dat~d the I 4th Au;~1st, 1~58,
P~-!!e 1301. For Proceedings in Assembly see Madhya Prac\<:sh V,dhan Sabha l r"ceeJ,r,gs
1958 Volume IV, no. I, pages 10-50, no. 2, page,, 100-135, no. 3, pages 210-247, no. 4, pages
~12-311, no. 5, paisc·s 400-HB, no. 6, pa,,:.-; 515 548 0 1959, Vu!. V, nu. 29, pa,:c 2594,uo. 36,
pages 3418-'."1443, no. 37 pa~ 3476-3526, no. 38, pa;ses 35G8-3f,()4, no. 39 page::1 3642-3678,
no. 40, pao/'S 3775-3805, no. 41, pages 3917-3988, no. 42_. pag_es 4022-4074, no. 43, pag'6
4-115- 4172, no. 44. pages 4303-4352, and no. 45, pa1se,,; 43.'lS-4429.
2nd October, 1959, see Govt. of M. P. Revenue Dcptt. Kot;rication No. J ll35-Vl1-N dat<:d
the 21st September, l 3!i9 pubii.i,ed on p,,.gc 1463 oJ' the ).;:,.dLya Pradesh Gaiette L."<tta
ordinary, dated the 21st September, 1959.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. !959
';bona±idc ag1 iculturist" mt:am a person who cdtivates land
personally or i,.vho may 1"casom1hly
be expected to cutli-
"co-operative s(,cietY., n.c<lH~ ;,
~,,citt} registered as such
;11dcr a.ay law rclati.ng to Cu-opi-:rative societies in force for
the- time being in any region of the State;
forest constituted as a
reserved fore~t or protected forest in accordance with the
provisions of the Indian .Forest Act, 1927 (XVI of 1927);
a person holding land from
the State Government under section 181;
(i) a parcel of land scpanitely a~sessed to land revenue and
held under one tenure; and
(ii) in reference to land held by a tenant a parcel of land
held from a Bhumiswarni under one lease or set of
"improvement" means wi,h rcfere!lce
to a holding, any
work which add~ mater::Jly
to the value of the holding
which i5 suitable tI1creto aHd con~·istent with the purpose for
which it is :1dd and ,vhich, ii not executed on the holding,
is either executed directly for its benefit or is after cxecuuon~
made directly beneficial 10 it; aud, subject to the foregoing
embankments and other >vorks for
distribution of \.\?.ter for agricultural
(ii) the construction of works for the drainage of land or
for the protection of land from floods, or from erOsion
or other dam.:1ge from water;
the plan 1 ing-
trees and thf" reclaiming,
or terracing of land;
(iv) the erection of lmildings on or iri the vicinity of the
tl,nn in the abi>.di or urban area,
required for the f:Onvenicnl
nccnpation of lhc holdint·,; and
(v) lhe renewal or reconstn1ction of <my of the foregoing
works, or altcralion~ th,"rein or additions thereto;
but does not include--
temporary wells and su(h w<ttercharmeb, embankments,
levelling, e:ndosures (1r other works or peuy alteration~
in or repairs to sw:h worb. as are cornmcnly m,ide b_y
cultivators of the locality in
the ordinary roune of
(b') any work whir:h suh~tanti.illy diminishes the value of any
wherecvcr 5itu:o.ted, in thr- ocrupation of any
other person. whf'ther a5 Bhumiswnmi or ocrnpam::y
E~planation.- A wor\r wPich lr1wfit, ;-rn;1·;;i) hol<lir:vs rr ,1y r,c dccmr,!'1 to
hf' an improvement with respect to eacJ, nf surh ho!dini~;
THE M.ApHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 19:~'i
(k] "land" mcarn a portion oJ the earth's surface whr:ther or
not under water; and, where land i, referred to in this
Code, it shall be deemed to inclnde all things attached to
or permanently fa:stened to any thmg attached to such land;
means ~1 P;"rson w o 13 a bonafide agricul-
turist and who whether mdiv1d11ally or jointly with other
members of hi. family hold no Lmds or land less than the-
are:1 which may be prescribed in this Jidrnlf;
Explanation.- For purposes of this clau,e the familv or a person :;:hall
be deemed to consbt of his spouse, issue and parents.
(m) "land rec orcls"
provbions of this Code;
"legal practitioner" means any person entitled
in any of the court, in lvfadhya Pradesh under the Legal
Practitioners Act 1 1879 (XVlII of 18 79), or under any otller
law for the tirr!e being in force;
(o) "mango grove" mf:aus 1nang·o trees planted in such n11n1ber~
that they preclude or when fui! gro\v11 are likely to preclude
the h,nd on ,vhich they stand or any major portion thereof
(p) "orchard" meaJJs fruit trees planted in such numbers that
they preclude or when full g;rnwn are likely to preclude the
they stand or any major portion Lhcreof
from being used primarily for
any p1H'posc other than
phln ti :,g of trees;
(q) "plot nmnbcr" rn.cans a portion of .land in
fonm:cl in to er recogni~ed as a plot number under section
93, in re~pect of \\;hich the ace,1 and the land revenue
;o:'e se::iaratd y c: ttr_:red i,1
the pre,cri bed records
under an indicative number aru_l includes any portion of
land entered in the pre\·joi_t, rccorris nncler an indicative
number known as kh2.sra or survey number;
(r) "rccngni,ed agent" in reference to a party to a proceeding
11nde~- the ctode means-
(i) a person authorised under a power of attorney by such
party to make appearance and applications and to do
other acts on his behalf in such proceedings; and
(ii) a person authodscd in ·writing by such party to make
appearance on his behA[f in such proceedings;
"region" rneAr1s the Mahakoshal region,
the Bhopal region, the Vindhya Pradesh
region and the Sirm~j region, or any of the~e,
(t) "rcn ts" means ,..,·hateve-.r is paid or i~ payf'l.ble in money or
by an occupancy tenant to his Bhurniswami accordins
tn the provisions of section 188 or by a lessee to hi11
Bhumiswami on account of the use or occupation of
land held by him from such Bhumiswami; or
(ii) by a Government Jessee to the Government on aeeount
of the use or occupation of land leasted out to him
hy the Gow:rnmcn t;
See now 1he Ad,..ocates Act, 19€1 {25 of 1961).
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 195~
"Revenue Officer" in any provision of this Code means mch
notification, direct to discharge thr functions of a Revenue
Officer under that provision;
"revenue year" means the year commencinng on such d~te
:>.s t.he St:cte G::,ver.J.merit may, in the case of any special
local area, by notification, appoint;
"sub-division of a survey number" me:ans a portion of a
~urvey number in respect of which the ai ea Md the land
revenue p;;.y:1.lilc an:: sep<ir:itely e:Hcrcd in the land records
under an indicative number subordinate to that of the
survey numbers of which it is a po,·tion;
"survey number" means a portion of L:!irl i!l non-urban
area formed into, or recognised as a survey number at the last
preceding revenue survey, or subSequcntly recogni5cd as
Sllch by the Collector, in respect of \Vhich the l'l.rea and
land revenue payable are separately entered under an indicaM
tive nur:ibcr in tl,c !.J.nci records; and include&. any port.ion
of hnd en tcrcd in the land records under an indicative
number known as the khasra number;
as an occupancy tenant under
land from a Bhumiswaml
(.~) "tenure-holder" means a person who holds land from the
State Government a11d who is or is deemed to be Bhumiswami
under the provisions of this Code·
(iii) Dalbt'-ria lat:foJ:a (~hi:,ham);
Terminalia tomentorn (ain or ,.,,j);
(~-2) "to cultivate per~onally" means to culiivate on one's own
by one's own labour, or
by the labour of any member of one's family, or
(iii) by servants on wages payable in cash nr kind but uot
in crop share, or
(iv) by hired labour under one's personal supervision or the
of any member of one's family;
"unoccupied land" means the l.uiJ in a village other than
the abadi or service land, or the land held by a BhumisM
warni, a tenant or a Government lessee;
"urban area" means the area for the time being included
within the limits of any municipal corporation or any
municipality or notified area constituted under any law for
tlie time being in force relating to municipalities or any
village or group of vi1Iages which may be specified by the
State Government a~ 1trban
area; and the expre:isi()n
"non-urban area" ~hall be construed accordingly;
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Oomti.tutuion of Board of
Priocipal seat an<l other placei
of 11itting, of Row:\ of R"v"n\le.
Conditions o[ st"rvic.: of m~nbtrs
.I uradiction of Board.
(z-5) '.'vill~ge" n,ean~ any tn.,ct ofla.nd which, bcfvrc the co:miI1g
intc, wrce of tl,is Cvde, was recognised as or v.-as declared
as a village under the provisions cf anv law for the time
bci;,g in force and any other tract of Jarid which is hereafter
recognised as a village at any revenue survey or which the
Statc Gnvcrnment may, by notification, declare to be a
Any reference made in tl\is Code to the date of coming into force of
thi~ Code shall he construed as areferP,n<"'e to the date appointed by notifica-
tion under sub-~cction (3) 0f secti<'n J.
(I) There shall be a Board of Revenue for Madhya Pradesh con-
sisting ofa President and two or more other members as tl-,e State Government
may, from time tn time. :1,_i1~k fit to appoint.
The Board ('If Re, cnw- as connitutnl 2nd functioning for the sev.,.ral
regions ofthi~ State immediately before the coming into force
hereinafter ;.n this Chapter referred to as the existing Board, shall
from the date of coming into force of this Code, be dr:cmed to be the Board of
Revcrwf> fnr 1-f,,dh~·a Pradesh con~titnted t;ndcr this section.
The Pre~idrw :md members of the existing Board shall be
an<l members respectively of the Board of Revenue for
The prlnciral sc:'t oi the Board sh2.ll 1:-f> :-at ,,uch place as the State
may, by notified order, appo'.nt..
Notwith~tanciiug iwything contained in sub-~ection (i), the President
and member~ of the Board may st,o :'it at ~urh otl:cr plaH" or rfoccs as the
Pre~ident of the Bor.nl may with tlw approval of the State Government, appoint.
\Vhen ,.:,y men1bcr is, by reas,;n cf dJ5cnce or otherwise, unable
the duties of his office, the State Government m:iy, by notification,
-person to he. for the time being,?. member of the Board,
L-xcqn ns cxpre~~Jy provided by this Code, the terms
tions of service of the Presi,ient um! n.e:rr.bers ofd1c lloard dwll be .~nrh as may
he preserihecl and tl1c term~ ,m<l conditions laid down by the State Government
for thP, President and membc1~ of the existing Board shail
until modified or superseded under this section.
A person ~hall n(/t be nualified for appointment as a member of the
Board nnles~ hr --
1s eligible for appointment as a Judge of the High Court; or
hct~ been a Rew·nue Officer, and has held, for at least five vears,
an office not lower in rank than that of a Collector.
There shall be paid to tlH· memben of the Board such salaries md
allowances as the State Governn,eHt rn-'.'s
allow;,.nc-c~ shall be chare;ed on the cons0lidr,ted fond of the State.
Thr: Board ,hall exerdsr the powers and discharge the functicm~
conft:rrcd up 'll it by or under this Code an<l such functions of the State Govern-
ment as mav be soecified hv notification bv the State Government in that behalf
:nd sud1 otLT fu~rtiom ::to" have J)l'"en conferred or may be conferred by or under
anv 8f'.'!1r1l or Staw .".,1 0,1 the Chi1efReven11e A11th0ritY or thC' Chief Controlling
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE . CODE,· 1959
The State Government may, subject to such conditions as it may
deem fit to impose, by notification, confer upon, or entrust to the Board or any
member of the Board
additional powers or functions assigned to the State
Government by or imder. any enartment for the time being in force.
The Board shall, in resp(:{;, of all matters subject to its appellate or
revisional j u.risdiction, have superintendence over all authorities in so for as
·,uch authorities deal with such matters and may call for returns.
The Board may make rules for the exercist: of power~ and functions
of the Board, by benches constituted of one or more members thereof, and all
decisions given by such benches in exercise af ~uch pow1::rs or functions sh;a.ll be
deemed fo be tht: decisions. of the Board.
All appeal5, applications for revision and other proceedings pending
before the existing Board immediatdy before the coming jntnforce ofthi! Code
shall he heafd and decided by the Board.
Revenue Officers, their ClalSes and Powers
. Exerci:ie of jJ..UUdietion by
single memb<::rs and benches.
' c:ase;. pending at commence
11. There shall be thc- following classes of the Revenue Officers, namely:-
Commissioners (includiug Additional Commissioners);
Settlement Commissioner (including Additional Settlement Commissio-
Collectors (including Ad<litional Collectors);
Settlcmen t Office, s;
Assistan ~ Callee tors;
Deputy Coll cc tors;
[Deputy Se ttkmen t Officers; Ji
.\ssi ~tan 1. Se ttlcmen t Officers;
Ta.hsildars (including· Additional Tahsildan1;
Superintendents of Land Records;
A..ssi sta '.1 t Super in te:1 den ts of Land Records.
(I) All Revenue Officen-. ~hall lie sub-ordinate to the State Govern.
Control onr R~·e,me OflicC'r,,.
(2) All Revenue OJJicers in a Division shall be subordinate to the Commi-
L'nks~ the State Government otherwise directs all Revenue Officers
in a district shall he subordinate to the CoJlector.
(l) The State Government may create divisions comprising of such
districts as it may deem fit and may abolish or alter the limits of such divisjons
In~- hy M. P. Act 15 uf 1960, .S.2.
Power to alter, c~ate or abolish
tim MADHYA PRADESH LAND RFVENUE CODE, 1959
Power to appoint Commis&ioncrs
PoWf:r to appoint Additional
Power to appoint Collector
Power to appoint Additional
Appointment and powers of
The State Government may alter the limits of any district or tahsil
and may. cr~ate new, .o~ _aboJish existing district~ or tahsils, and may divide--
any distrJCt mto sub-d1vrnons and may alter the hmits of or abolish
Provided that the State Government before passing any orders under
thi~ section on aHy proposal to alter the limits of any division or district or tahsih
or to create ~ew or abolish existing divisiom, districts or raJisils, shall publish
in the prescnbcd form such proposals
for inviting objection~ and shall take
into consideration auy objCctions to such propn~al.
Subject to the orders of lhc State Gov("rnme:-it under sub-section
(2), every tahsil shall be deemed lo be a su]J-division ofa district.
(l) The State Government shall appoint in each divis10n ;,. Commi-
ssioucr who shall exercise therein the powers and discharge the duties coHferred
and imposed on a commissioner hy or u;1der this Code or by or under anv
other enactment for the time bcin,~ in frircc.
The State Government may, mhject to such conditions as it mav
deem fit to impose, by notification, co11fcr upon the Commissioner any of the
powers or fanetions as~igaed to the State Government by or under any enact-
ment for the time being in force.
(I) The State Goverr,mcnt may appoint an
ssioner in a division or in two or more divisions.
An Additional Commissio,1er shall exercise such powers c,nd dis-
charge such dutie,; c::i11ferred and imposed on a Commissioner by or under
this Code or by or un.dcc any other enactment for the time being in force
insurh cases or class of cases as the State Government may, by a general order,
notify or as the Commissioner of the division may, subject to anv general or
special re,trictions imposed· by the State Government, by an order in writing
This Co::le and every other enactment for the time being in force
and any rnle mfld'! u'l-1,:r this Co:l,:: or :-!'lY such other enactment shall, except
where ex.pre>s1y dlrecte:i otherwise, apply to the
when exerci'iing- any powers or di,charging any duties under sub-section (2)
as if he 1'/Cre the Com"ni~sioiter of the division.
The State Government shall appoint ir:i each district a
shall exercie~ therci.'1 the pfJwcrs and dis,;harge the duties conferred and
imposed 0-11 a C 1J!ler:tor hy or under this (;ode or any other enactmentfor the
time being in force.
(I) The St.-tte Government may appoint one or more
Collectors in a di~trict.
An Additio;1al Collector shall exercise such powers and discharge
Sitch dntics confern:d a'1d imno.,ed O'l a Dolkdor by or under this Code or by
or und"' a!lY r)thf'r FT1cr'lle,1t for tlie time being i'l force, in
rlas5 of cases as tht: State Governmf:nt may, by ~ g-cneral o,der,. notify_ o: as
1:he Gollcctor of the rfistric:t mav, suhject to a>lf g-erieral or wecial restnctJOns
imposed by the State G-.vernment, b)' an order in writing direct.
This Code and everv other enactmen1" for the time bein_g in
and anv rnle made nn<ler this,Code or any mch other enactment shall, ex,cpt
when:. exures3Jv dirert-:d o~hcrwis.e, apply to. the A..-Iditi0nal ~ollector, \~'}1~~
exerc1smg a.r:iv power~ or d1schargmg- anv d,tties under sub-scctrnn (21, as 1
were the Collect0r of the district.
18. The State Government may aoooint for each district a~ mary persons
as it thinks fit to be A~sistant CoJlectors of the first and second _i;:-rades and Deputy
Collectors who shall exercise such powers as the Sta1c Gcvernmer,t r.-:y, !iy
(l) The State Government roay appoint in each tahsil a Tahsildar
or more Naib-Tahsildars who shall exercise therein the powers and
perform the duties conferred or imposed on them by or under this Code or under
any other enactment for the time being in force.
The State Government may appoint one or more Additional Tah-
sildars in a tahsil.
An Additional Tahsildar shall cxrercise such powers and
discharge such duties connferred or imposed on a Tahsildar by or under this
Coe.le or by or 1mder any other enactment for the time being in force as the
Collector of the district may by an order in writing direct.
20. {I) The State Government may appoint to each district as
persons as it thinks fit to be Superintendents of Land Records and Assistant
Superintendents of Land Records.
The Superintedents and A~sistant Superintendents of Land Records
shall exercise the powers and perform the duties crniforred
them by or under this Code or anv other enactment for the time
(!) The State Government may appoint such other officers
invest them with such powers as may be necessary to give effect to the provi-
sions of this Code.
Such officers shall discharge such duties and be subordim,te to such
authoritie:s as the State Govrnment may direct.
of Land Record.~ and Assistant
[ ( l) The Colle{' tor may place one or more Assi~tan t Collectors of rn b-divisiona l Officer~.
D~p uty Collectors in-charge of a sub-division of a district or in-charge of tv,.·o
or more sub-divisions of a district]1
Such· Assistant Collector or Deputy Collector shall be called a Sub-
Divisional Officer and sh:i.11 exercise such powers of a Coller.tor as the State
Government may, by notifir.a.tion, direct.
Unless the Collector otherwise directs, every Revenue Officer in a
sub-division shall be subordi'late to the Sub-Divisional Officer and a :!\a.ib-
Tah~ildar in a tahsil shall be subordinate to the Tahsildar.
(I) The State G:wcrnmc-nt may conrer on any person the powers
conferred by or w1dcr this C:ode on any Revenue Officer.
may confer on any Assistant Collector,
Tahsildar or :hib-Tah~ildar the powers conferred by this Code on a Revenue
Officer of a higher grade_
25. lf any- Revenu": Officer, who has been invested with any powers
under this Cod,c: in U'l\' talnil or district, is . cransferred to an equal or hi1!her
0ffir,e of the same na t 1 ;re in ,ny other tahsil or district, · he ~hcil I, ll.': ks~ ' · t 1": e
State Gaverame:1t ot".ierwisc directs, ex1'.rcise the s.,1.me pn1,vcrs under thi~
in such other tahsil or district.
If the Col lee tnr di,c:s or is disabled from pcrforn,ing hio r,,,1 ;,,,, 1 J.e
0 f!k:cr who is wmnorari!v nJar,ed in charge of the current duties of the Collector
shall he held to be the Colledor ll'tder -this Code inti! the State Gov,,,.nmc'lt
apooints a succe~mr to the nollector so dying or <lisabled and snrh sncre%or
tale~ charge of his aonoin.tmelt.
Proct!dure of revenue officers and Revenue Courts
Confrrral bv State Government
of po wcrs of R ev~n ue Officers
on Officials and other persons.
Poweri exercisahle on transfer.
Collector in case of temporary
27. Except for reasons to be ~ecorded in \ffiting, no Revenue Officer
Place for holding enquiries.
,h;,11 <'Tiq11irc into. oi hear' ;inv case- r-.t a'lY pb C<" on tside the loc;iJ limits of his
l. Subs. b,,- !\I. P. Act 53 of J 984. S. 2.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CvDE, 1959
Power to enti:r upon and
Powe, to transf<'f rase,.
Power to tran,frr ca.,.,-, to and
Conferral oi ,1.,:us of Cnurti
on Board an,i Rrve!'w
lnbe~n! p<iwer ,,r R.-ffnu.-
Powe,-,, of Reve,rnr Officers to
require attendance of penoru.
and productin of rlocumen'-
aud to n:c6ve eidence,
Provided that a Sub-Divisional Officer may enquire into, or hear, an}'
casb at any place within the <listr'ct 10 which he is appomted.
28. All Revenue officers,
revenue inspectors, measurers an<l patwarit
and when under their observation and control, their servants and
so directed, may enter upon and survey land and demarcate boundariet
and do other acts connected with their duties under this Code or any other
enactment for the time being in force and in so doing shall cause no more damage
than may he required for the due performance of their duties :
Provided that no person shall enter into any building or upon any enclosed
court or garden attached to a dwelling house, unlcs.; with the coment of the
occupier thereof, without giving such occupier at lel':st twenty-four hours notice,
and in making such c;1try due regard shall be paid to the social and religon~
sentiments of the occupier.
29. (I) Whenever it appears to the Board that an order under this sec-
tion is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct that any particular case
be transferred from one Revenue Officer to another Revenue Officc·r of and
equal or su!)erior rank in the same district or any other district.
The Commissioner, on an application made to him in this
may, if he is of opinion that it is expedient for the ends of justice, order that
any particular case be transferred from a Revenue Officer to ar,other Revenue
Officer of an equal or superior rank in the same district or :my other district
m the same division.
(1) A Collector, a Sub-Divisional Officer, or a Tahsildar nrny lll<lke
over any case or class of cases arising under the provisions of this Code or anv
other enactment for the time being in force, for decision from his own file t~
any" Revenue Officer subordinate to him competent to decide such case or class
of c.:i.scs, or may withdraw any case or class of cases frc-'ll any such Revenue
Officer and may deal with such case or class of cases himself or refer the same
for disposal to any other Revenue Officer subordinate to him competent to
decide such case or clas,; of cases.
\ Commissioner, a Collector, a Sub-Divisional Officer, or a TahsiJ
dar may make over for inquiry and report any case or class of eases ari~ing under
the provision, ofthi.'> Code or any other enactmet for the ,:me being in force
from his own file to any Revenue Officer subordinate to him.
31 . .The Board or a Revenue Officer, while exercising power under thh
Cock or any other enactrne11t for the time being in force to enquire into or to
any question arising- for determination between the State Governmct
and any person or between parties to any proceedings, shall be u Revenue
Nothin~ in this Code shall be deemed to limit or othernise affect
the inherent power of the Re\'enue Court to make such order~ as may be nece-
ssary for the ends of justice or to prevent the abuse of the process of the Court.
33. (1) Subject to the provisions of section~ 132 and 133 of the Code of Civil
Prottedure, 1908 (V of 1908) and to rules made under section 41, every Revenue
Officer act_in~ as a Revenue Court shall have power to take evidence, to ~ummon
any person whose attcndencr: he considers necessary either to be examined as
a party or to give evidence as a witness or to produce any document f0r the
purposes of any inquiry or ca~e arising under this Code or any other enact-
ment for the time being in force.
No person ~hall~ order-ed to attend in person, unless he resides-
within the limits of the tahsil if the Revenue Officer acting
as a Revenue Court is a Naib-Tahsildar ahd in thr: case of an'\·
other Revenue Officer, within the local limits of his jurisdiction';
THE MADHYA PRADIISH LANll ltlilffll!RlE ~qpj, I~~
without such limits but at a place leS1l than fifty, or where there is
a railway communication or other established public convcy~nce
for five-sixths of the distance between the place where he resides
and the place where he is summoned to attend, less than two
hundred miles distant from such place.
Any person present may be required by any such Revenue Officer
to give evidence or tu produce any document then and there in his possession
Every such Revenue Officer shall have power to
ssion to examine any person who is exempted from attending Court or who
cannot be ordered to attend in person or is unable to attend on account of
34. lf any person on whom a summons to attend as witnes~ or to pro-
duce any document has been served fails to comply with the summons, the
officer hy whom the summons has been issued under section 33 may-
issue a bailable warrant of arrest;
order him to furnish security for appearance; or
impo~e upon him a fine not exceeding rupeesfifty.
{I) If on the date fixed for hearing a ca5e or procecdi11g, a Revenue
Hearing in absence of patty.
O!ficer fmd.s that a summons or notice w.:s not served on any party due to the
failure of the opposite party to pay the requisite process fees for such service,
the case or proceeding may be dismissed in default of payment of such process
lf any party to a rase or proceeding be-fore a Revenue Officer does
not ~ppear on the date fixed for hearing af1cr due service of a notice or snmmons
0n him the case may be heard and determilled in his absence or may be dis-
n1issed in default, as the case may be.
The party agair,ot whom any order is passed under st1b-section (l)
O:r (2) may apply within thirty ditys from the date of s11ch order or knowledge
0 f_ the order in case the notice or summons was not duly served, to
aside on _the ground that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from paying
the rcqu1stc process foes for service of a summorn or notice on the opposite party
or from appearing at the hearing and the Revenue Officer may, after
to the opposite party which was present on the date on which such order was
passed anrl after making such iaquiry as he C'"l:1.siders necess1!ry, set aside the
_'Vhere an application filed under mb-section (3) is 1ejected,
party aggrr_c~ed m;J,y file an appeal to the authority to whom an
from an original order passed by sud, officer .
Except as provided i;. sub~section (4) or except where a case
c_ee.dmg hCTorf"" am· Reveil.ue Offa:cr has hccr1 decided on merits, no appeal
he from an order p;1.ssc<l under this section.
A Revenue Officer may, from time to time, for reasons
recorded a-n.~l on surh terms as ti) eosts, adjourn the hearing of a cas;e or
The d,te and place of m <HU01trned hearing of a case or proceedi11g
shall be intimated at rhe time of thr.
acljournmf'"nt to such of the partie, r~1,d
witncs~es as are present.
37. ,\ Rr:venuc Officer may award costs incurred in any case or pro~
cecding arising under th;s Code or any other enc.ctment for the
force in sue! mannr;r and to such extt'"lll, as he thinks fit:
Manner of aecuting ordtr to
deliver pos:,ession of immovable
PC:;~n~· bv whom appe~rari:ces
and applic:'ation, may btc made
l,~fore and to Revenue Olhcers.
Effeet1 of ru',es in Schedule 1
Power of Hoard to mah·
Provided that the fees of a legal pranitiour shall n()t .be allowed
·costs in any such ca~e or proceeding, unless such officer considers
fol' reasons to be recmded by.him in writing.
38. Where any person against Whom an order to deliver possession
i~movable property has been passed
ex:-ecuted in the following manner, namely:-
by serving a notice on the perlion or persons in pOssessioll requiring
them within such time as may appear reasonable after receipt of
the said notice to vacate the land; and
if such notice is not obeyed, by removing or deputing a subordi~
nate to remove any person who may refuse to vacate the same;
if the officer removing any such person is reSisted or obstructed by
any person, the Revenue Officer shall hold a summary inquii-y
into the facts of the case, and ;f-satisfied that the resistance or
obstruction was without any just cause, and that such rt'sistance
or obstruction still coniinuc~, may, without prejudice to any pro-
ceedings to which such person may be liable under any law for the
time being in force for the p1wishmct1t of such resistance 01 obstruc
tion, take or cau~e to be taken, such steps and use, or cause to hf'
used, such force-as m.iy, in the- opinion of snch officer, be reasonabl)'
necessary for 5ecuring complicancf' with the order.
Save as othen,,;ise provided in any other enactment for the
all appearances before, applications to and acts to he done he-
fore any Rcvcnne Officer under this Code or any other enactment for the ·time
being· in foree mJ.y be made or done by the partie~ themselves or by their
recognised agents or by any legal
Provided that sulijcct to the proYisions of :sections 132 and 133 of the
Code of Civil Procedure,
19C8 (V of 1908), any su(:h appearance- shall, if the
Revenue Officer so directs, be made by the party in pen-on:
Provided further thflt ai:;peara.nce alone ITay be m:~de by a recognisi:d
agent falling under item (ii) of clause (ri of mb-section (1) of S('ction 2.
40· 1he rule, in Sctd,ulc I sl.all ha\c effect as if enacted in the Iiody
of this Code until .1nnulled er altc1 eel in ,:sn;,1 daue "'ith 11:c provisio.~ d tJ.i,
(l) The Board m;:1y, from tin:e to time, make rules consistent
p1ovisions of this Cede 1t:gulnrirg the practice ::.-rd procedure ofthc Board
and the procedure to Cc .lllcwed by other Rcvent.;e Courb ,rnd may by sudi
rules annul, alter (,r add to ;,.l] or n,y of the rult;c in Echeduk I.
Tn particular and without prejudice to the generali1y of the Pow1crs
conferred by sub-~ection {IJ, ~uch rule~ may provide for all or any of the follow-
the service of summons, notices and otl:er prc,esscs, by post or in
any other manner either generally or in any .~pecified arerui, and
the proof of such ~ervicc;
the regulatior; of power of Re,,·enue Officer~ to wmmon parties and
witnes~es <md the gi-ant of' expenses to witne.~scs;
the rr-gulatiun of rccogni.M:d
agents with regard to appearancQ,
applications and acts done by them in proceeding, under thi~ Code;
procedure to be observccliu dT~cting attachment of movable and
procedure for vublishing-, cnnducting, sr-ttine: aside and confirming
soles and all ancillary m.tttm connecte<l with .'H.1<.:h proceedings;
·the riiaintenance and custody, while under attachment, of live-
·stock and other movable property, the fees payable for such main-
tenance and custo:ly, the sale of such live-stock
and the proceeds o: 5uch sale;
consolidation of appeals and other proceedingsi
all forms, registers, books, entries and accounts which may be
flecessary or desirable for the transaction of the business of
the time within which, in the absence of any express provision,
appeals or applicati6ns for revision may be filed;
the cost of and incidental to a~y proceedings;
examination of wit11esscs on commission and payment of
expenses incidental to such examination;
licensing of petition-writers and the regulation of their conduct.
Suth rules shall be subject to the condition of previous publication
and approval of the State Government, .ind after they arc so made and approved
they shall be publi~hed in the Gazette, and shall, from the date of publication
or from such other date as may be specified, have tl-e same force and effcc... as
if they were con taincd in Schedule I.
>J"o order pas~ed by a Revenue Offictr shall be
in appeal or revision on account of any error, omission or irrtgularity in the
summons, notice, proclamation, warra.nt or o:der or other proceedings before
or during anv enqniry or other proceedings under this Code,
error, omissio11, or irregularity has in fact occasioned a failure of justice.
Explanation.- In determinining whether any
error, omission or irre-
g-ularity in any proceedings under this Code has occasioned a failure ofjusf.lcc
rei;;ard shall be had to the fact whether the objection could and should have
raised at an earlie1 stage i.n the pror.eeding-s.
Order, of Revenue 011,cer
when reversible bv rca~on of
43. Unle~ ?therwisc expres,ly provided in thi~ Code, th A procedure laid down jCorlc of Civil Procedure to
m the Code ofCtVll Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908) shall, so far as may be, he folioWecl apply when no express pro,-i-
in all prorcedings under thi~ Code.
~ion made in thi-s Cnc\e.
Appeal, Revision And Review
Save where it has been otherwise provided, an appeal
lie from every origi.n~l order under this Code or the rules
(a) if such ordt!r is passed by any Revenue Officer subordinate
to the Sub-Divisional Officer, whether or not the officer
pas5ing the order is invested with the powers of the CollcctOI
to the Sub-Divisional Officer;
(bl if such order is passed bv tl1e Sub-Divhional Officer, whether
or not i.wc~ted with ,the powers of the Collector-to the
(c) if such order is pa~sed by any Revenue Officer suboridinate
to the Sl"ttlement Officer-to the Settlement Officer;
(rl) if such or~er !s passed by anr Revenue Officer in re~pect of
wltom a d1rec1011 has been 1~sued 1mder sub-~tion (3) of
~ectio'l 12 or ~uh-section (2)
of section 21-to such Revenue
Officer as the State Government may direct;
(c:) if ~uch or<l,er is passed by a Collector wh!!ther exercising the
nnw,.r~ rif (.,-,11,.dr,r nr s,.tt],.,..,,.nt Offi<',.,.., rl11r;,lZ thr curr,.ncy
of the term of ~ettlement-to the Commissioner;
Tim MADHYA. PRADESH LAND JtEVENUE COi.)£. 1959
Tra.nsler of certain pending
No appeal against catain
1..i mitation of appeal;;.
(f) if such order is passed by a ~ettlement Officer
exercising ~he power~ of S_ettlement Officer or the ~owers of a
Collector m connection with any settlement operation \lnless
otherwise expressly provided-to the Settlement Commissioner;
(g) if such order is passed by the Commissioner or the Settlement
Save as otherwise provided a seco11d appeal shall lie ngainst e\'cry
order passed in first appeal under this Code or the rules
(i) by the Sub-Divisional Officer or the Collector to the Commis-
by the Settlement Officer to the Settlement Commissioner;
by the Commissioner to the Board-
( a) if the original order has in the first appeal been varied or
reversed otherwise than in;-: matter of cost; or
on any of the following grounds and no other, namely:-..
that the order is r.ontrary to law or usage having the
force of law; or
that the order has failed to determine some material
issue of law or usage having force of law;. or
that thne has been a substantial error or defect in the
procedure as prescribed by this Code, which may have
produced error or defect in the decision of th.e case
upon merits ] 1
An order passed in review varying or reversing any order shall bt
appealable in like manner as the original order.
All proceedings arising from the Madhya Bharat regior. and pending
before the Director of Land .Records in appeal_, revision or review immediately
before the coming into force of lhis Code, shall star1d transfelTt:=d to
ment Commissioner and ever-y such proceeding :shall be licard and decidt;d by
tht.'! Settlement Commissioner as if it had been entertained by him under the
prov1s1om of this Code-.
Ko appeal shall lie under this Code from an order---
admitting an appeal or application for review on the gro1.nds
specified in section 5 of tt,e Indian Limit~tion Act, 1908 (IX of
rejecting an application for review; er
granting or rej~cting ::i.n application for stay; or
of an interim nature; or
relating to appointment 11nde1· suh-~rction (2) of sec:tirn1 l C4 0r
5ub-section (l) of section 1()6.h
',7. Nll appe;.tl :ihall lie: ..
to the Suh.Divisional Officer or Coikct< r e
Sci t krr e11 '. Cffifer
or·. Settli-mcn.t Commissiener, after the cx-pirati0n of forty-fhre
days from the date of the order to"hich cl,:ccticr-. ·~ n:r~.e; or
Sub1 by M ~- AJ:t 10 of 1974. S. 2.
Now ~ee the l.i111iiation Act, l!J63 ( 36 or 1963).
3. Subs, by M. P. Act 24 of 1961, S.2.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENLE CODE, 1959
to the Cornmi~~ioner after the r,xpiratif'n of siny day~ from
to the Board, aftrr the expiration of nine-ty days from such date:
Provided tb:t an appeal to any Revenue C~fficer specified
from an order passed iu the l\,1adhya Bharrit
region before the comin~ into
force of this Code may be filed before the rxplra1ion of oixty <lays from the date
of such order :
Provided further dial where ;-1 party, other thm1 a party ,,gaimt whom
tht! order has been passe-d ex-partc, had no previous notice of the date on Which
the order is passed, limitation under this section shall be computed from the
date of the communication ofsurh order.
Every petition for appeal, review ur revision shall be accompanied by
a certified copy of the order to which ol!jcction is made tl.Jllcs~ the production
of such rnpy is dispensed with.
Copy of ordec objected to
(l} The appellate authority may either admit the appeal or, after
calling for the tecord mid giving the appellant an opportunity to be heard, may
Provided that the appdltac authorit) ~J,all not be bHmrl to
record where the appeal is time-barred or dOc"' not lie.
Ir the appeal is admitted, chr.tc sh,tll be fixed for hearing and
notice sh2II be ,crn·d f,n d,e l!"'.J)OJi('.<->r.L
Afte. hca6ns the pa.tics, if thev appcac, the appellate authority
may conLn~- Yary or reverse the order ~ppea!crl against; or may direcr snch
to be made, or such additional evidence to be taken,
as it may think . necessary; or may itself take such add! titional evidence; or
may remo>nd the ca~e for disposal with such directions as it thinks fit.
The Board or the Commissioner or the Settlement Commissioner
or the Collector or· the Settlemcut Officer mav at anv time on its/his motioi. or
on the application made by any party for the' purpOSe of satisfyin'.g itself/himself
as to legality or propriety of any order pas~ed by or as to the regularity of the
proceedings of any R(..ve-nut: Officer subordinate to it/him call for, and examine
the record of any (·as,: pc1,ding before, or disposed of by surh officer, and may
pass such order in reference- thcrf'.to as it/he thinks fit :
(i) 1w applic,ttiou for revisioH sh.ill be cnter!iiined-
agaimt J.1' order appeab.ble undrr th.is Code:
(b) against an order of the- Settlement Commis~ioner under section
no rnch application shall
be 1:nterlai1:ed unless presented within
sixty days to the Commis5ioner or the Settlement Cominissioncr ~r
the Collector or the Settlement Ofiic,_)r. as the case may be, or Within
ninety days tO the Board of Revenne from the d.ate of the order and
in coinpufing the period aforrsaid, timf" rcqnisilf' for obtaining a copy
of the ~aid orde-.r shall he excluded :
(ii(, no order shall he varied or rever;;ed in re-vi~ion 1mlc~s notice has been
served on the partic>s interested :n,d opportrn1ity given to them of
(2) :>rotwithst,mdo,g anydting comained in sub-S<Ttion (1)-
(i) where piOceedings in respect (,f any ca~e 11.ivc been commenced ~y ·
the Hoard nnder sub-~ection (!) no 'actioH shall be taken by the Com-
missioner 01 the Settlement Cornmii,simtcr or tht r,ollecfor · or the
S('tdement Officer in rcspen then:of;
THt:: MADFYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
{ii) where proceetlings in respect of any case have been commenced h1
th ... Commissioner or the Settlement Commissioner under sub-section
(I). no action shall be taken by the CoHector or Settlement Officer
(iii) where proceediugs in respect of any such case have been commenced
by the Commissioner, Settlement Officer under sub-section (I), the
Board may either refrain from taking any action under this section
in respect of such case until the final disposal of such proceedings by
the Commissioner or the Settlement Commissioner or Collector or
the SettlOQletH Officer, as the case may be, or may withd1 aw such
proceedings and pass such order as it may deem fit;
(iv) where proceedings in respect of any such case have been commepcf'd
by the Collector or the Scttlemr;nt Officer under sub-section (I), the
Commissioner or the Settlr..n,ent
Cornmi~ioner may either refraul
from takmg any action under this section in respect of such case
until the final disposal of such proceedings by the Collector or tht"
Settlement Officer, as the case may be, or may withdraw sud1
proceedings and pass such order as it may deem fit.
Explanation.- -For the purpose of this sectini~ aU Rcver:uc Officers shalt
be' deemed to be subordinate to the Board.]
(]) The Board and every Revenue Officer may, cithtt on its/his
own motion or on the application of any party interested review any order passed
by itself/himself or by any of its/his predecessors in ofl1ce and pass such order
in reference thereto as it/he tl-inks fit ;
if the Commissioner, Settlement Comm.issinncr, Collector or Settle-
ment Officer thinks it necessary to review any order which he has not
himself passed, he shaH first obtain the sanction of tbe Hoard, and
if an officer subordinate to a Collector or Sett.lemem Officer proposes
to review any order, whether passed by himself or by any predecessor,
he shall first obtain the sanction in writing of the authority to whom
he is immed;ately subordinatc.;]11
f(i-a) no order shaH be varied or renrsed unless notice has been
given to the parties interested to appear and be heard in support
no order from which an appeal has been made, or which is the
subject of any revision proceedings shall, so long as such appeal
orproceedings are pending, be reviewed;
(iii) no order affecting any question of right between private persons
shall be .reviewed except on the application of a party to the
proceedings, and no application for the review of such order
shall be entertained unless it is made within ninety days from the
pass.jug of the order.
· (2) No order shall be reviewed except on the grounds provided for in,thc
OOl!le- of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908).
For the purposes of this section the CoUector shaH be deemed to be
the successor in office of any Revenue Officer who has left the district or who h;as
ceased to exercise powers as a Revenue Officer and to whom there is no successOl" IJl
An orde,r which has been dealt with in appeal or- on revision
not be reviewed by any Revenue Officer subordinate to the appellate or
1 -,Sub,. hyM. P.-Act 25 ol" 1964, S.2.
2. 'tns. by S.3. ibid.
3. Renumbered by, S.3, ibid
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE,· 1959
A Revenue Officer who has passed any order or his successor
Stay of rxrcution of mdo:lS.
in office may, at any time before the expiry of the period prescribed for appeal
or revision, direct the execution of such order to be stayed for such time as may
be requisite for filing an appeal or revision and obtaining a stay ord,-r from the
appellate or revisional authority.
The appellate or revisional authonty n~ay, at any time direct the
the execution of the order appealed from or against which a revision is made
to be stayed for mch time as it may think fit.
The authority exercising the powers conferred by ~ection 50 or section
51 may direct the execution of the order under revision or review to be stayed
for such time as it may think fit.
The Revenue Offict:r or the authority din."rting th:- exewtion of an
order to be stayed may impose such conditions or order such security to be furnished
as he or it thinks fit.
No order directing the stay of r..xecution of any order skill be passed
-except in accordance wit}·, the provisions of this section.
Sul:tiect to any express pro\,ision con taincd in t11is Code the pro-
Application of Limitation Act.
visions of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of 1908),· sJ1all apply to all appeals
and applications for review under this Code.
Notwithstanding anything ccntained iH this Chapter, but subject
to the provisions of section 45, all proceedings pending in revision before any
Revenue Officer immediately before the coming into force of this Code, shall
be heard and decided by such Revenue Officer as if this Code had not been passed.
For avoidance of doubt,
it is hereby declared that wve as other-
wise expressly provided in this Code, the provisions of this Chapt,:-r shall apply to-
all orders passed by any Revcnve Offa:er
of corning in.to force of this Code and against which no
or n:vision proceedings are pending before
all proceedings before Revenue Officers, notwithstanding that
they were instituted or cornmenccd or arose out of proceedings
comme.nced before the coming into force
In this Chapter_. unless the cmitcxt otherv.i!c requires, expression
"order'" means the formal expression of the deci~ion gin:ll by the Board or a
Revenue Officer in respect of any matter in exercise of its/his powers under this
Code or any other enactment for the time being in force, as the case may be.] 1
LAND ANU LAND REVENUE
All lands belong to the State Government and it is hereby
declared that all such lands, including standing and flowing water, mines,
quarries, minerals and forests reserved or not, and all rights in the sub-soil of any
land are the property of the State Government :
[Provided that nothing in this section shall, save as other.vise provided
in this Code, be deemed to affect any rights of any pe~on subsi~ting at the coming
into force of this Code in any such property.Js
Now ~,.. tbl" Limitation Act. 19fi3 ( !!ff of 1963).
Subs, by M. P. Aci lO of 197-4-, S. 3.
i. Sub11. br M. P. Act 8 of 1979, S. 2.
State 0w1m'lhip in all Jandl.
THE 'MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, -1959
there~ d:spuu: ;,ri~c~ hct\\Ccn tlte~t;:,w Go,ernnTnt :,nd any-person
in respect f)f any rigl 1 t under q_ib-srction
(l) sud, dispuw shall be decided by
A11y pcrsoH aggrieved hy m,y crdtr
may institute a civil ~ult to contest the validity of the order within a period of
one rear frow the date cf' ~uc:h order.
L3<l.(a) Notwithswnding anything cont,,ined in the Code of Civil Procedure,
I 908 (V of 1908) no Civil Co1,rt shall, in a
orcfor 0f tempordry injurn-f('n <list11rb the peroon tn whom pc_sse~sion
i~ restored nnd,_. section 250 if such person fornishcs n reliable ~uretv
agg1ieved party again~( any lo~:; in case the
Givil Court grants a decree iu favour of the aggrie,·cd party:
Provided that no ~nrety ~hall hr required to lw furni~h~d hy a member
of a trihr. dedarcd to h
mt ,tborigiim! tribe undc-1· ,nh-s.·Ttion {6) of section
(b) Where a Ci..-il CoL1rl by an order 0f tcmponuy ;lljunctio~ di~tw-bcd
tht'. person refo1Tt:d to in clal1Se (a) on <r ,iiler 24th Ot·tobcr, 1983
pnblicatiou of Rc,·enue Department's Notification
No, l-70-VTT-:K-2-83. dated 4th Janwiry, 1984 such order shall abate
011 :,ad1 puLlicaLim1 and th(· T:ihsildur :-..hall restore posi;cssion to a
pe-rsou wlw is disturbed by ~uch ordcr. ]2
Where ,! civil ~uit has been ins1iuted under sub-section
nay order surh order ~h.:11 not be subject to appeal or rtvision.
Li11-bility of Ian.-! to paymrnt
All fond. tn whi<tt:VF-r J'npo,t~ arphd ~!nrl '"'I:crncr ~·1tl'Me,
is liable to the p1,ymc11 t of revenue to tb· State Oon·rEme11t, except suclt }and
as ha!l been wholly cxemp1ed from such liability hy special grant of or comi-act
\'lr·ith the State Government- or undc-r the nrovi~ior;, of ,mv law r-r nik- for lh~
from parmeat o( 1.md revenur-
-,.;"_; '··.t_ ....... ,.:
tim~ b~in~ in force.
Surh rrvcnne i~ called "kn<l rcvem,t"'; and that term includes all
mnnev D.tvable 10 thr Sr2tc Go\-e1·r1wtnt fnr k,nd. :r1orwhh·tandiug that mch
mone;,s ~-?,~;' be described a~ prcmit,.m, rrnt
i<:,tsc monr-y. quiH-ent or in any
r>ther manner, in any emwtrnent, rult\ contract or deed.
3[_:.iH-.t'. N<.l1With, rnnrling <1J1\"tl1ing c<mtHincd in thi'. Cc·dr, Hf, ln c: rn r·M:c
sl111JI be rnynb!<' in re~pcct nf ,m lint·rnH<·mk hokl:1.r , :)t"d t>::,wh_:;.;q!y fr=r 111~
Explanation I.- For the purpo~t· of i·his ;;t'.dio11.-
[ {n~'111}t"('Ot10rnic holding' ~hal1 me,;n [I. ]1okling tlH.: C\!C.'1,1 (.f whch
not more tlmn :i ,wrc$;]i
'holding' ~hall nwan th~ rmtli-c Ja.nd hf'ld by ,i per$On jn the State,
noh,.·i1hstanding . rla~ fr ct 1.ha.1 :1.ny . JJori-ir,n rh·n·r,f ii, ~c·p.ira lf:]y
as~f'.s~r~l tn land rrvenue; and
'fond revenue' r<l;all not ind~ide mone~·s pnyabl(' 10 the State Goveri:i.-
mr.nt fo.r lm1d by wny of·premium; rent or lt~a~e mor.ep in re:ot-
pect ofl,1.nd leastd 0,11 l'oi a p~riod oflf'~s tl1nn fivr y<:;or~ ,.,r quit-
l. f-uh~. _hy ~,J.J . \ct 2~ of 19Gl. 8.4, fo1· "Col!cl'tm".
In~ .... in it· _;,pplication' to thr:
A..:as hr C.overn.mt-ht of . ·Mad!iya
Pradt·~h, R1·n·11ue Departm~nt'~ Nol.ifieaiion .Ko. l-70-VII-N-2-83, dated the- 5th· Janmi..-y
b, th~ Gov~i-nor of Madhya Pnu.k~h under ~ub-paragr,;,ph (I) ofparavraph
.5 of rhe l'ifrh Srhcdu!t, to 1he ( :on&tituion of India, rul,lishf"d in the lHadhya Pra,IC11h
Ri_jpatra ".-\sadhr,man· dnto.:rl the 6-'..th Jan11ary 198.4,. ·pa_'fe~·2-!1~29.·
<;ul,,. I;,· M. P_ Ar;( ~3 ot 1972, S. 2,
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. _1959
E:s:planarion II.-- For the purpose of clause (b) of
Explanation l"cntire land held hy a person in the State', shall mea.n-
the entire land held by a person is the State individually and shall
where land is held by such person jointly with one or more
persons, so much portion of tbe land as falls to his share; and
land held by such person as Bhoodan holder under the 1-,fa-
dhya Pradesh Bhowan Yagna Act, 1968 (28 of 1968); and
where land is held by a person jointly with one or more persons,
the singl<' holding so jointly held]
(l) The assesrn,ent of h,nd i:-evenue on ai,v land [shall be made]1
with reference to the usr of bnd~
for the purpose of agriculture;
as sites for dwelling houses;
for purposes othe1 than those specified in items (a), (b) or (d);
for industrial or commercial purpose.
\/.,/here land assessed for use for any one purpose is diverted to any
other purpose, the lard revenue payable upon such land ,hall, norwith standing
that the term for ,vhich the a_e;_,essmcnt may have been fi.xcd has not expired,
be liable to be altered and assessed in accordance with the purposc tc' --which
it has been diverted.
The alterat;on or asses,mcnt referred to in sub-section (2) shall
be carried out by the Sub-Divi~ional Officcr.)2
Where the land held free from the payment of land revenue
condition of beir1g u,ed for any purpost is diverted to :my other
shall become liable to the p:iyIDent of land revenue and assessed in accordance
with the purpose to which it has been diverted.
The a,se~mient m,tde under sub-~ectiom (2)
accordunce with th,.. rules made by the State Gcwcrnmcnt iu this behalf and
such rules ,hall be in accord.ince with the principles contained in C:hapter VII
or VIII, as the case may be.
\\'here land for use for nr:y one purpo~c 1,
diverted to any other
purpose, and land n:venuc is a,~.essed tluTeOn under the provisions of this sec-
tion, the [Sub-Divisio11al Cfh<er]~ shall also hav-c power to impose a premium
on the diversion in accordance with rules made under this Code:
Provided that no premium shdl be irnpo5ed for the divenion of any land
KotwitL,tanriinia; anv m<1ge or £rnnt or anvthinl! contained in MY
law, the right of all persoits lH;lding,_land, \ddch irr:n:'c<liat~ly before the com~
ing into fore,-, of the Ma.dhy;-i Pradesh b,nd Revenue Code, 1954 (II of 1955),
was he;ld in malik, rnakhuza right, to exemption from payment of premium on
diversion of ~uch land is hereby abolished; but every such pcrwn shall, on
diversion uf mch land, he entitled in lieu of ~uch right to a rebate equal to the
land revenue for one yt-ar payable for such land from the amount of premium
determined under sub-section (5).
1. Sub~. by JI,{_ P, Act 25 <>£ 1964, S. 4' (i), for "ahall be mde, or 1ha\l be deemed tJo bave
been made as the case may he"
2. Inst. by S. 4- {ii). ibid.
3. Sut.. by M. P. Act 24. of 1961 for
Variation of lann rn·r.nuc
which land ia w.fil.
THE MAIDHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
Assessment when to take effoct .
Rea93essment on diversion o.-
land prior to coming into forct"
A!IS<'-Sllment Ly whom to l,,.
App'inHion ol thi, Chapt.-r to
lai1d~ in non-urban area\.
and lht-: i,: p,C\·\'t.~rs a~:<I duties.
Al!sistant .Sett leme·,: t Offin·, s.
The alte-ration or a5sessment made under the provision of section
59 shall take effect from the date on whi.ch the diversion was made.
59-B. 'Where prior 10 tht' coming into torcc~ cif 1h:s Cnle I.,; cl in ?ny
or,e pl~rpo~e wa::: rnb~t:Ol1e;·,tk diver:ul. fo1 i:u: to
any other purpose, the '1, .. nd
n.\"CUt.c p,,ybl<: upon· !:ud1· /;12,ci i.Jai!, notv.iths-
tanding that the term for which the assessment may have been fixed has nol
expirt:d, be liable to be altered and a~sesscd-
( 1 J in accordance with the purpose to which it h.:,s been diverted wid,
the date on which such diversion was made if in tr.c area
concerned there was in force
any c.aactment repealed u:ider
which contained provision for alteration or
reassessm.,nt on such divcnion;
the date of coming in to force (Jf this Code in any other case; and
in ca.~e of (a) above in accordance with the provisions of f>uch repeal-
ed Act, and in rhe case of {b) above in accordance with the provisiom of thi~
60. On all lands on which the assessment h?..s not lxen n:.-.dc the a~~ess-
ment of land revenue shall be made by the Collector in accon:lanc·e with rules
made under this Code.
Revenue Survey and Setdement iu Non-Urban Areas
A---, Application .,f Chap ln ;md Officers en conduct Revcm,c Survey
61. The provi~ions of this Chapter sh.all ~pply in rc~pect of laHds in non-
62. The Statt~ Oovt:.rnmem may appoint a Scttkn-em
who shall, :::ubject ,,, 1he 1.0.atrci of the Sh·a· Gon:rnn,rnt co.·rc-1 tL< orcn:.ti( 1>
of the revt>.llU1·: .'lurvey mid/or ~-c:ttltn:.r'nt.
(I) The S1,nc Govcrr:m:ent n:r.y ,ipp.lint <.,u.; m·
Sett h~men t Commissicncr,;.
(2) An Additional Scttkmcnl C(.mn~if:.i<:Hcr ~h,Jl(·xerci~e !nh J,C,.,..cri
and discharge such duties, conferred ,md far:prn·t:d
or, a Settlement Commis-
sioner by this Code or by any ()1her ct1.?.ctment fn t! _;; titt.e being .ill force or
by ~-i·iy rule made under this Code or r,.ny ~·ncl1. otL_t:· eJ,N:trr,ent): _~1 ( h cr,i:e~.
or classc"i of case~, as the Su: !e Q(wcr;m:,c;;t or Sctt!c.mcr:t Ccn:u:i:.;10r,(;r rr.av
direct :-) .. ad ,vhile r:xercising ~uch po"c ·~ ~-.nd di~chargii!g ,uC'h dut:c.~, the Acldi1:'.
onal Se-ttl.cnien t Commissioner ~hal: be dct·mcd to have teen appc,;.n ,c-ci as u
Settlement C01rm!!sioner for lb..: purpores r.f this Ced~ or M;-' 01hc1· en.actrrcnt
or a.ny rule made under this Code or such 01her c1:.:c:trr-01t.
64. 0) The State Government may
c::..lled the SP.ttiemeut Officer to he in chfl.rre of .: rc,.·a .. ,t: rnrvey. and/ r
Settlement and c.!!\ rnanv
Dep\lty Settkrr.rnt Cff.cr:·s and Assistrnt Settkrr,ent
Officer~ as it thinks fit.·
(2) All Scttlemcn t, Drp nty Sc ttlemen t and Assistant Settlemer.t Officers
subordinatP. to the SettlP.me:nt Cowmisi,ioner a.nd all Dr:rmtv Settle":-
ment and A!lsist.::int Settlement Officers in a focal area shall be suhordin:.1w to
the Se.ttlcmen t Officers.
!. Jm. by M. P  ..-1.::1 15 of 1q75, S, 2.
TilE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
(1) The State Government may invest any Settlement Officer or
Deputy Settlement Officer or AS.'list~t Settlement Offic.er :,vith a!l o~ any of
the powers of a Collecto;· under
tlus Code, to be excrc:.o(:ti by hun m such
cases or classes of cases as the Stale Govcrnme;.t may J.r.-,~ct.
(2) The State Government m.:.y inve:,t ;.ny Deputy Settelement
Officet· or Assistant Settlement Officer with ..:.lJ
or any of the powers of a
Seulement Officer iu1dcr tLi~ Cnck or :my oth('r enactment for the tin;e being
The operations carried out in accordance with the provisions of thi~
part, that is to say-
all or any of iJ, t' opera ti ns pertaining to the division of land
into survey numbers and grouping them into village,:, recognition
of existing survey r.umbers,
reconstitution thereoJ or forming
new survt.y numbers and operations incirlental thereto;
preparation or, as the case may be, rev1s1on
preparation oi" record of rights, in order to bring
records upto-<latc in any local, over area
are called a revenue snrvcy,
(I 1 \Vhcnever du: State Government decides that a revenue su1-VC)'
should be 'n;ade of il!l.y local aTC":t, i~ shall publish a notificl'ltion to that effect,
and ·,ucl1 local area s!.;11 be held to be under mch :;1.crvcv 1mm the ck.te t,f sucli
nocif1cr..t10,1 u;nil tb.:: '.,~ue ,-_.f ,1 aotification decl;,;·ing th; oper:.,.tions to he do~cd.
S·1ch :1otification may i;;~tt>Jld liJ all L::11ds ircncrally in
area or to sudi lamb o,1lv as L:1c Stale G,wernment may direct.
Sc!hjecl to ruL.:s ma<le under thi.s Cod;::, the Settlement Officer mays.-
t<tkc me;A~urc,w~clts of the land to \vhich the ren::nue survev exte-
nd~ and co:-.,m ud snch number of suncy marks the;on as
divide s1,ch laids into survey numbers an<l g1·oup the survey
nu"11'.,,,.-.: i 1'.·1 villages; and
recn.~ui~c tx;,,_::q; survey numLet). :'l:Con,titu!c sL:t-vey numbers,
o:· ff,1 .·:: .,c,.1· ~urvcy numhen
Prnvil'.,·J tk.' cxcc1 t .is hercinaftc~ provided, no ;urvcy, n11mber, com-
prisiat{ land ,,~cd for agrin1lt,t!'d purpo~es
sl,_ali lte11cd-Jrrh be made 'of Jess
extC'J.t thai cl minimum to he p:-cec;-jhed f,,-r the vario1.~ dassc~ of land ;
Prn,idcd further tl1at dH:: limit pre,cribcd undt;r th:
~b-1'. not apply iH )·c c;J.,f" of ,.unc~ mr: brr'. :-:l1trGy (X,'
1-icforc the datr: of rl:, notifica::or, under ,1.:b-~tcti0r, (!) of ,ec\irn-.. fi7.
):;11_with~umdi:·,r-, th(" provi~iom of section 6B wl1cn a.I,\· portion of
agricultural '.,t!1tC ;, di\T:~:ed nnder 1hc provislons of ~euioi'. 172 10 anv 1;.on-
agricdt :,:a! :"' r-, , or ,,·he .. ,,,1y porti!,J1 of land is speciallr [,ssi,~.r.ec( mHirr
,.,hc.'1 ar,~· ;,:,·e~'.,mn,t i~ altt>red on any portion of iand under
sulHoction (2) of S':cti<'. 59, il,c Settlement Officer may
into a separ,i.te sun.,.y numher or sulJ-division of a survey numbtr.
(I} The Settlement Officer may either
survt.·y numbers into as m:rny snb-divi~iom ?.s may be n::q_1,ired in view nf the
acquisition of ri~ths in b:i.r.1 or for any other· re,,son.
Powen of Settlement, Deputy
Definition of Revenue sutvey
Formation of n,rvey numb<"r<
Separate demarcation of !an,1
diverted or specially assigned.
TIIE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
The division of survey numbers into sub-divisions and the apportion.
ment o! the a~cssmcnt of the . smvey number amongst the sub-divioiom shall
he earned out m accordance with rules made under this Code and such rules
may provide limits either of area or of land revenue or both below which no
sub-division shall be recognised :
f ntry of !urvey numbel'!I and
Determination of abadi of
Pow-r of So,ttkmcnt Officer
1:o divide or unite villages or
Provided that the total amount of asses5mcnt of any
shall not be enhanced during tht: term of a settlement nnless
is liable to alteration under the provisions of this Code.
\\'here a hold:ing consists of several khasra numbers the Settlement
Officer shall assess the land revenue payable for each khru;ra numbe-,r and
record them as separate survey numbers.
'\'Vhenever the survey numbers are reuumbered,
Officer shall correct the entries in all records prepared or maintained under
71 · The area and asses.sment of survey numbers and
survey numbers shall be entered in Sllch records as may be presc"ribed.
The Settlement Officer shall, in the case of every
ascerlain and determine, with due regard to rights in lands, the area to be
reserved for the residence of the inhabitants or for purposes ancillary thereto,
and snch area shall be deemed to be the abadi of thC' village.
The Settlement Officer m.:iy divide a village to constitute two or more ·_1
viii.ages or may amalgamate two or more villages and constitute one Yillage
or may alter the limits of a village by including therein any area of a village
in the vicinity thereof or by excluding
any area comprised tt.e,ein, in
accordance with the rules made under this Code.
The villages of each district or tahsil or part of a district or tahsil
comprised in the area under reve1 ue suney shall be formed into group¥, and
informing slKh group regard shall be had to physical features, agricultural
nnd economic conditions and trade facilities and communications.
The result of the operations carried out in accordance with this
part in continuation of revenue survey in order to determine or revise the
land revenue payable on land~ in any local area are called "~cttlement"
and the period during- which the revised land revenue shall be in force is
called the term of Settlement.
On issue of a notification declaring the operations of rtve.nue
ro be dosed under sub-section (l; of section 67, the State Govern-
ment, if it decides that St·tclement 0perations ~hou]d be undertaken in the
local area in which revenue survey is closed, ~hall publish a notifirnticn
to that eff0ct and such area shall be held to J-,c 1inder Se-ttleme11t from the date
of such notification until the announcement ofScltlcrnent nndff scctivn 82 in
· respect of a !and in the local area is complete:
Provided that if the notification is i,sued after expiration of a pr>riod
of five years from
thr date ol i~~u~ of notificatinn (!eclaring, ihe operations
of revenue survei-y to he clo~ed under sub-section (]) of section 67, record
of rights shall be prepared under section 108 befor<: the Settlement opera-
tions are undertaken in accordance with the provi~ion~ contained in this
On completing the nec~a.ry inquiries, as may be prescribed,
Settlement Officer Wall forward to the State Government his proposab
for assessment rates for different classes of land in such form and along with
such other particulars as may be prescribed.
THE MADHYA. PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
The State Government may approve the assessment rates with ~uch
modifications as it may deem fit.
78 The maximum and m1minnrm limits for the assessment rate shall
respect.vely be one and quarter time, and
three.fourth of the assessment
rate_ in force for the ti~e being:
Provided that in the event it is· considered de,irable to alter the
minimum or maximum limits, aforesaid, a proposal to that effect shall be
laid on the table of the Legislative As11embly for its approval and the
limits of assessment rate ,hall thereafter be altered in accordance with the
Mu.Ullum and minimum liwita
for the rate of asacumcnt.
79. The Settlement ('fliccr shall fix the asse~iment on each holding ii:
Fixation of fair -.l'.ent.
accordance with the assessment rates approved under section 77 and the pro-
visions of the section 81 and such assessmer,t shall be the fair :i.sse55merit of such
The Settlement Officer shall have the power to make fair assessment
All bmk liable to as,essmcnt.
on all lands what-so-over to which the Settlement extend~, whether such
land9 are liable to the payment of land revenue or not.
81 . (1) The fair assessment of all lands shall be calculated in accor<lauce
with the principles and restrictiorn setforth in the section.
(2) No regard shall be had to any claim to hold land on privileged
Regard ~hall be had in the case of agricultural land to the
profits of agriculture, to the consideration paid for leases' to the sale prices ofland
on mortgages, and in
agricultural land, t_o the value of the !and for the purpose for which it is held.
The fair assessment on land used for non-agricultiu-al purpases
shaU not exceed thirty-three per centum of the c-stimated rental value of the land.
Where an improvement has been effected at any time in any
holdtng held for the purpose of agriculture by or at the
holder thereof, the fair a~sessment of such holding ~hall be fixed as if the jmpro-
vement had not been made.
Except for special reasom to be approved in each case by the
State Government. no increase in the fair asscS5mcnt of a holding for the pur-
pose of agriculture shall exceed fifty per centum of the existing assessment
(l) When the asses:-rnent of anv land has been fixed in accordance
with Stction 79, notin: thereof shall be given in accordance with rules made
this Code, ar;_d such notice shall be called the announcement of the
The asses~ment of any land, as armouaced under this setion,
shall be tbe land revenue payable
annu;,lly on such land during the tr:rni
of the sctth:mcnt nnless it is modified in accordance with the provisions of 'this
Code, or any other law,
83. The term of a settlement shall commenr:e from
the revenue year next following the date of announcement or from the expiry
of -the previow t<"Tm of settlement, whichever is later.
During the firM year ~f the term of settlement any Bhumiswami,
Remission of ,-nhancern=t tD
who is dissc1.tisfied with the new a~sessment shall, on relinquisJ-,ing his rights
in his holding ·in the manner prescribed by .section I 73 may, one ID:onth before
tI1c conunent:enieut of the agricultural year, 1"<..ceive a rem.iss.ion uf a,iy increall("
imposed thueby : ,
nm MAbHY A PRADESH LAND REVENUE coi:>E, 1959
Power of Col!ector to com pkt'"
agrirnJture and valu~ of land.
· du t}~ ·of
POWtt of Sub-Divisional Othcer
Pr~ .. 'ided that the rel~~ciuisli~_ent of ~nly part of a h~ldil)g ~r of a hol..
dmg, which, or any part ot which, 1s wbject to an encumbrance or a charge
mall not be permitted.
(1) The term of settlement shall be fixed by the State Governmew
and shall 11ot be less than thirty years ;
P;ovided that _if, at an}: tun~ , during the currency. of the sett](!ment, the
State Government fmds that· having regard to. dianges in general conditiOfi).
suhseque1: c to tho settiemen t, it is , d1:siri;.ble that the , asse-ssmel'l-t should bt
redUiced, 1 t may reduce such assessment ior such period as it may deem fit.
N_ otwj thstanding an ythin!! contained i~ rnb-section. -( I J in an} - area
whe~e there JS ample scope for extention of cultzvat1cn or for agr.icultural develo-
ment or where tl1e pit~h of rents is unduly low. or where there has been a
rapid devel_opment of resources uwing to the construction of roads, railways
or canals smce the last settlement, the State Goven1ment may_ for reasons
to be recorded, fix a term which may be Jess than thirty years but which shall
in JJO ca5e be less than twenty years.
Notwithstanding that the term of settlement fixed under sub-section
(1) ot sub-section (2J for any local area has expired. the term shall be deemed
to have been extended till the commenceme,nt of the trrm of the ~ubseque1q
settlement in that area..
\'Vhere the settlement operatior.s are closed all applicatious and
proceedings then pending before the Settlement Officer shall be transferred to
the Collector who shall have the powers of a Settlement Officer for their dis-
87. [I J \1\/ith dkct from the coming into fone of this code the State
GoYcrnment may take steps to institute and may
cause to be constantly
maintarned, in accorda1~ce v,ith rules made under this Code, an inquiry into
the profits of agric uJtu:, e and in to the value of land used for
,1nd non-agrieultur,i \ purposes
(2) For the purpose of determining the profits of agriculture, th.,-
J oll owing ·elements shall bF: taken in to account in e~t:rr.a ting tr,e cc; t { l
(a) the depreciation of stot.k and buildings;
(b) the money equivalent tc, the cultivator's and his family's
expenses urnalh incurred in culti,aticn on the
land which is under inquiry: anrl
(d) in.terest on the
cost of buildings and stock and c,n e.xpen-
ancl manure, and on cost of agricultural
(3J The Settlement Officer shall take into consideration tte informa-
tiun collected in the coune of this inquiry, when frnming his propo.als for
\.Vhen a local atea is.
maintaining the maps ··and -record~ may, under th_e .orden, of ~he State
Government, be transferred from C0Hector To ,the Settlement Off1cer, who
tht' powers conferred on the Collector in .any
of the provisions in Chapter IX and XVIII.
· 89; The Sub-Divi11ional Officer - may, a.t any t.ime aft er
of the revenue sune., and , ,during the -t1trni of settlement., correct any errbr
in the area or asse33ment of any survey number or holding due to mi~take
of .mrvey or arithmetical miscalculation :
.. ·., v, ... ';' ,H ., ) ,L --~,-,r-: d'' (th~1,
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 19S9
~ -~ . II: .-L
, Provided that no arrears of land revenue shall become payable by reason
After the closure of the revenue survey and. during the teflll of a
!ettlern:ent, the Collectcr, shall, when so directed by the State ·Government,
excer'Cise the powers of a Settlement Officer
under sections 68, 69, 70, 72
91. · The State Government may, after the cl~lll'e t>f-t'he- revenue survey
and during the term of settlement, invest
any Revenue Officer with all or
any of the power Qf the Settemem Officer
under this Chapter, within such
area and subject to such restrictions and for such period a, it may think fit .
The State Government may make rules for regula~ing generally
the conduct of a revenue survey or Settlement under this Chapter,)l
Assessment And Re-ass~s~ent Of Laud
( l) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply
to land held jn urban
area, whether.for agricultural or non-agricultural purposes-
by a Government lessee under a lease granting a right of
by a holder of service land.
Whenever the land -revenue or- re»t assessed -on a .plot·,number
d~1~ for r~vision the Collector shall assess the plot in accordance with the pro-
\'1s10ns of this Chapter.
· Explanation.--- For tht purposes of thi! section, the
land revenue or rc.-it
payable for a plot shall be deemed due for revision~-
if the plot is held on a lease ~hen the lea~ becomes d~e for
in the case of a plot held· by a Bhumiswani on the expiry of the
original term of settlcn,;:;1: t.
Subject to rules made u!1der this Codt:, the Collector may--
divide the land, i'1 an urban area into plot numbers, and
recognise existing survey numbers as plot numbers, reconstitute
plot numbers or form new plot numbers.
(I) The CoUec tor may, ci ther rell wnb.er
into a5 many sub-divisions as may- be required :Ul
right~ in land or for any other reason.
or ,sub-di.,-ide ,ph?t :numbers
view of the acquisition of
; l < 1 1
Th6 division of plot numbers inm sub~divisions and th~ -~PP-
or_tion ment of the- aS11cssment of the -plot- number aroJJ11v;t tho ;,ml,-.d.ivi$ir;lns
shall be carried nut ln- acoordanCO' with rules made: under this Code an-d :ru£b
rnles may provide limits eri thcr of area , OI". o£ land ,revenue ,or,. rOlJ.1,- a'f the., ~
may b~,ri;· \nth i 1 a,v local ar-::1., b+Jw which no sub-division shall be recognised:
, , , .
Provided that the total amou.-.t of asSC~sm~nt
not be enhanced ·tluthg the te!'m of:!iettlement unless
to alteration under the provisions of this Code.
of any plot number shall
The area and asse~ment of plot ~umbers and sub-divisiQil~iof·plot
I. Subs. by M, P. Act 16 of 1985, S.2.
Power of Coliector during te!"lll
Power to make rule.
Provisions of Chapter to apply
to land urban areal.
Powen of Collector to divide
land, into plot numbers.
Powers of Colltctor to tt:hmn t t
or Sub-divide plot numbcn.
Area and assl$met1t Of plot
numbers and iub-division1 to
be entered in records.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND UL\ENUE CODE, 1959
Area in mwn formed into
blocb for as.sessmen t.
Collector to fut standar<l.rate
of assessment and pub[icaiior,
fixation of standard rate.,
limits for the rate of
Collector to a!&Cs$ p Iot at
rate i:,rescri b cd.
For the purposes of assesSinent, the area in a wwn shall be fonucd
mto blocks and- in forming such blocks regard shall be l1ad to t.151; of land fot
indust~al, coinmercial, residential or such ocher special purposes as may_ be - -
The Collector shall with the approval of the State Govern-
ment, fix in accordance with the provisions of section 98 the standard rate of
assessment per one hm1drcd square feet of Iandin the case of non-agricultural
land and per acre of land ill the case of agricultural land in each block in au
urban area and such standard rates shall be pu!Jliwed in such manner as may
The rate:; published under sub-secti0l1(1)shall remain in force
for ten years and shall thereafter be deemed to be in force until altered.
98. [(I) The Collector shaH keep a record in accordance with the rules
made under this Code of all registered saJes and leases of lands in the different
blocks inurban areas in respect of land held for each of the purpose mentioned
in sub-section (l) of section 59.
(2) The average annual letting value of lands in each block in
respect of land held for purposes mentioned in sub-section (1) of section
shalt be determined separately in the prescribed manner on the basis of tt::m-
sactions of sales and leases in respect of the land held for each of the aforesaid
purposes in such block during the period of five year., immediately preceding the
year in which the letting value is being' determined, so for a-'> the information
about such transactions is available :
Provided that if the transactions which have taken place in any block in
respect of any Jand held for any of the aforsaid purpose are not sufficiently
representative transactions in respect of the land held for the corresponding
purpose dnring the same period in -adjacent block may be taken as basis for
determining the letting value.
The standard rate of assessment for lands held for purp0$Cs
mentioned in dau.se (b) or (c) of snh-scction(I) of section 59 shall be equal to
one-third of the average annual letting value determined or the block in respect
of such land under mb-section (2) and for purposes mentioned in clause {b)
of sub-section (1) of sertion 59 shall be one half of the average annual lettmg
valne determined for the block in respect of such land.] l
The standard rates for hnds held for agricultural purposes
shall be fixed with due regard to soil and position ofla.nd and to the profit~ of
agriculture. to the consideration paid for leases and to the sale prices of such
The maximum aitd minimum limit for the rate of assessment shall
re5pectivcly be one and quarter time$ a:td three-fourths of the standard rate in
force for the tinie being.
The Coilcctor shall assess the plot at a rate within the limits pres-
cribed by sectiou 99 regard being had to the use,situation and the other advantages
or disadvantages attaching to such plot :
Provided that if. in th~ case of lands which arc being a s.ses~ed for a purpose
with reference to whi~h thev were asses8Cd immedi:i.tclv before the revision, the
a!sessment so arrived at exc;eds, in the case of agricult;1ral land one and a half
times the land revenue or rent and in the case of other lands six times the land
rev~nue or rent payable immediately before the revision the assessm~nt shal!
be fixed at one and a half times such laud revenue or rent in the case of agricultur_al
laJid and at six_ times such land revenne or rent in the case of other lands :
Provided · further, that where an imprflvcmen t has been effected at any
time in any holding held for the purpose of agriculture by or at the ~xpen~ of
the holder thereof, the assessment of such holding shall be fixed as 1f the im-
provement· h.i:d not been m:i.de.
I. _ Subs, by M. P, Act_ 15 of_ 1975, S.3.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE,. 19S~
The assessment fixed under section 100 shall remain in force foL
period of thirtylears or fot such longer period as may elapse before re-assessment
after that perio and such period shall be deemed to be the term of ;;t',ttlement
The assessment fixed under section 100 sh.all be the land revenue
or_ rent payable annually on ~1tch plot number unless it is modified in accordance
with the provisions of this Code or any other law.
103. The land revenue or rent fixed for any land in an
under a settlement or a lease from Government with rights of
before the i;oming into force of this Code shall, notwithstanding
of the term of such settlement or lease, continue in force
ment on :such land is fixed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
( l} The Collector shall from time to time arrange the
the tahsil in patwari circles and may, at any time, alter the limits of
exhting circle and may create new circlCll or abolish existing ones.
[The Collector] 1 tllall appoint one or more patwaris 10 each
patwJ.ri circle for the mlintenancc and correction of land records
such other duties as the State Government may pres_cribe.
Notwithstanding any usage or anytingJcontai.ncd in any treaty,
grant, or other instrument, uo person shall have any right or claim to continue
or to be appointed as a patwari on the ground of right to succeed to such office
105. The Collector shall arrange the patwari circles in the tahsil into
revenue inspectors' circles and may, at any time, alccr the limits of any cxi~ting
circle and may create n~w circles or abolish existing circles.
10_6. (! 1 The Collec;t~r may appoint to each dist:ict as many persons.
as he thinks fit to be reven~e inspectors, t~wn surveyo:s, assistant town surveyors
and measurcrs to supervise the preparation and maintenance of land records
and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed.
The town surveyor and assistant town
deemed to br a patwari for the purposes of sections 28, 109 110 112 118 and
120 in respect of the areas under their charge.
{l} There shall be prepared a map sl1owing the
survey numbers or plot numbers and _waste fands c-a!Jed the field map
f'.Nery village except when otherwise directed by thr State Governmcn t.
(2) There may be pr<'pa1ed for the abadi of each village a map
showing the area occupied by private holders and the area not so occupied and
such other particulars as may be prescribed.
If the State Government considers that in the case of avy
villag;i it 1s necessary to show separately in the map prepared under sub-se('tion
(2)the plots occupied by private holders, it may dire<:t the Collector to get
the map so prepared or revised.
(4) . If any Gram Panchayat passes a
resolution that a map of
th?v1llage ahad1 sh~uld _ 1-i_e preparl'd _showmg separately the plNs OC"cupif.d by
private holdt:rs and is willing to contribute to thr. cost of survey operations in
such proportion as may be prescribed, the State Government may under-take
the preparation of such map.
A,p.u, $ * fixed shalt be-
Ja-1.-l re,,.enue or n:nt.
Land revenue or JC:nf
llettktrien ( OT !cue,
ol patw.uis tPi creto.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LANO REVENUE CODE !9.i9
Acquisition of rights to be
li. , . 1[(5) _Sud~ m1p. ,l'.all b" pn'par-:J
01· re:·1sed, as the ca~c may
r_ c "--ttleint>,H U,J1ci,r ,.1, l re,:cc,uc survcy]2 :·.n<l Dv the Collector at all
Innes and in all other circumswnn·s.J
IH this behalf be
prepared .,nC. maintained fo, c,-cry ,:JJrgc 011d suC"h
(a) the names of al] Bhurniswarnis
numbers or nlot numbers held hy them and their area,
(b) the name~ of aJI occupancy tenants and Government
li"ssres togethf'r with ~mTey number~ or plot numbers
held by them and their area, irrigated or unirrigated;
(c) th<' nature and extent of the respective interests of such
pi~, sons and the conditions or liabilities, if any, attaching
the rt:lll or land revenue . if anv
(c) such other i:articulan as may be prescribe<l.
prepared during a [reve11ue survey)-5
m,1.y, by notificatiou, so direct.]
(I) Any person lawfully acquiring 1:ny right
. .. J6 shall report orally or
such right to the pat,vari withi!I six momhi. from tl:e date oi such acqui:o:itwr:,
,t!ld the patwari shall at once give a written acknowledgment for such report
to the person making it in the prescribecl form :
Provided that when the person acquiring th,.; riglil
otherwise disqualified. hi~ gnanlian or other person
, property shall make the- rqJort w the patwari.
[Explauati011 I.- 1hc right mC'ntioi1.cd abe\e tlcc.s. r.Pt
(twn.t <ir a charge, not amounting -co a mortgage, of the kind
section JOO oftllf' Tramfcr of11r0pertv Ace 1882 (IV of 1882)f:
or p.;.id off·or a ka~e
acquire~ a riglu within
of thi~ chapter, the term "patwari"
indud.-~ any pcrsoJl appniatccl to perform the dut1c~ of a Pat~ari under this
Explanation lV.--Intimation in writing reqmr(;d to be givcll to the pat-
~yari under this_ section may ht: giVt'll either through a_ mesengrr or handed
· over ;·u perso11 or lll.1\' he se-nt l.1y rcgiwored post.
A11y ,uch pcrsOH as i~ n::forred to in sub-section (!) may also report
hi~ acquisition of such rights w the Tahsilrlat within six months
r; nrr, thr ..-1..itr" nf S'lch :ic1111i~itirn1.
S"b,. by !\f. l' .. \,-( 1~ ofl'lBO. S Ii.
2. Subs. by ;,.1, P. Act \Ii ol J~J85. ~.3. for"Srttkment"'.
:t Re-numbered by M. P. A~t ~~ ,,f 1%4. S.5.
Sub~ .. by M. P. Act 16 cl 1985, SA, for "Sntkm<'nt".
\"lords, "required by or uuder se<:ti,;n 10:; ,11 b" ''nterrxl in tlir; ,·,,,;md of right~.
"omitted by \f. P. A(l 2:", of 19fi4, S ,; ',~l.
f=uh by S. 6 {b), ibid"
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
lht> Pcttwari skdl tukr in1e, a reQ'istcr pr,·Kribcd
purpus,; cv,-~-y ~,rcpnsitinn nf right nc:portf'.d to h,;m under sel'lion ll'9 or ·which
co1nes to his nolice L om in1in1z, tio,1 fnltn Gi :·:1 L ?.1nd1a: at ,Jr ,lny other source.
(2) Tiu". Patwari ,,h:;ll i11tin,:1\:, all tl·,c repons 1cg,,rdi1& ~.cquisition
of right rcC\"J,C'U hy Lim under' sub-section (I) to tbt: Tahsiklar within thitty
days of the receipt thereof by him.
(3) Oll receipt of tlic intinrntiOH from patwari under
(2J,thc Tahsiklar shall h,ise it published in the villag·e in the prescribed manner
and shall also give written intimation thereof to all persons appearing to him
to be iutereste<l in the mutation aJtd also to such otl,er person and authorities
.as may be prescribed.
(4) The Tahsildar shall after afford'ng reasonable opportmi.ity of being
heard to the persons interested and. after making such farther enquiry, as
may deem neccs~.iry, make necessary entry in the Field Book and other rele--
11 l. The Civil Courts shall have jurisdiction to decide any dispute to
whirh lht' State Gov~rnrncnt is :".ot a party relating to any right which is recor-
ded in the record-01:righ ts.
\Vhcn any document purporting lO create, assign or extinguish
to or any charge on land used for agricultural purposes, or in res-
pect of which a field book has been prepared, is regi_steretl under the Indian
Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1903), th!' Rcgistc:dng· Offic!'r shall send inti-
mation to the Tahsildar having _jurisdiction over tht: area in which the land
is situ~tc i!l rnch form and at such time~ a, may be prescribe_d by rult::s under
The (Sub-Divisional OfficcrP may at any time, correct or cause
·tu be corrected any dcrical errors and any 1;!rrors which the parties interested
admit to have been made in the record-of-rights.
In addition to the map and Bhoo Adhikar Pustikas, there shall
be prepared for e.:i.ch vilhge a khasra or field book and such other land records
as ma.y he prescribed.
It shall be· obligatory upon every Bhmn;swami,
nar~ie is enforcd into the khasra or field book prepared under section 114, to
mamtain a Bho 11 Adhikar Avarn R1n Pustika in respect of his all holdings in
_a vtllagr: which sha.il be provided to him on pavmcnt of ~Heh fee as may be
~2) Th,:; Blwo Adhika1 Avam Rin Pustikct .shall be in two parts, nam~
dy Part I ,x.,misting of rights _owr holding and cacurnbr[lnces o,i the hold.in~
awl Part II con,i ,,ing of right~ over holding. recovery nf fond rcHrnie in roo
pc:r:t of Uu.: hnldi1,g and e1c1~mbr:ancc, 0,1 tll'! holding ,,,1d ~h;,,ll ,:ontain
~uch of the enlric.s of khasra c,r fidd tJ(ok
holditig of a Bhumiswami as may be pre:,l;ribed:
purticulars in respect of recovery of !,ind revenue, Government
loan arid non~Govcr:runent Jo,:n in
respect of ·such holding;
smh other parlinilar~_ .a:0 may be prc~cribed.
.(3) IH. c.-i.sc. of a.ay di.ffcre.'.1<:.a: bd;ween the en tries contained iu the
khasra or field book and the Bhoo Adhik,ar Ayam Rin Pustika the Tahsildar
· may, ·either· on hi~ own motion or on ,1n
anplication made t; him in that
· behalf and aftr.r making snch enri:uiry as he· may def:m
fit, dcddc the same
and th~ decision of the Tahsi.ldar shall be final.14 ·
------~------------'-- .. --. ·-·--··------- .
l. · Sub-I. by ,\.1. P. Act :!'i of l 964, S . 7.
Sub~- bv, S. 8. ibid.
Snbs. by S.~'- ihi<l, for "Tahsildar"
Sub,. by ~l- "P. ,\ct ll of 1974, S.2.
Mutation of acqusitiou of
right in· Field Book and
other re kvan t Ian d r-N:Offi£. ·
Jurooiction of Civil Counfi
Intimation of tranacn by
f'-0rrectio,, of clerical erron.
Bhoo Adhikar Avam Rin
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Couect.ion of wroug: ~nlly
iia ~a aud au.y other
·tand m:mds by tuper!Qr
Oiaputcs reganliug entry w
basta O!' in any athei:- land
&e.wnption u to cntricl ill!
Penalty for neglect to-furoish
Requisition of -ititaacc in
preparation of mapr,i and
Power to make rulCil tis
.l l l 5. If any Tahsildar finds that a wrong or incorrect en try has been
mad~ lll the land ~cords prepared under section II4 by an officer sub-ordinate
io him, he shall direct necessary changes to be made therein in red ink after
m~ng suc~1 enquiry from the person concerned as he may d~m fit after due
(I) If any person is aggrieved by an en try made in the land
records prepared under section 114 in
respect of matters other than those
referred to in section l08, he shall apply to the Tahsildar for its correction within
ond year of the date of such en try.
(2) The Tahsildar shall, after making such enquiry as he may deem
fit, pass necessary ciders in the mauer.]1
All entries made under this Chapter in the land records shall be
presumed to be correct until the contrary is proved.
118. (I) Any person, whose rights, interest or liabilities are required
to be or have been, entered in any record or register under this Chapter, shall
be bOUnd on the 1equisitiOB in writing of any Revenue Officer, 1·evenuc ;nspector
or patwari engaged in compiling Or revising the record
or register to furnish
or produce for his inspection, within one month from the date of such. requisi-
tion, all such information or documents needed for the correct compilation
or revision thereof as may be within his knowledge or in his possesi;ion or power.
The Revenue Officer, revenue inspector or patwari to whom any
in.fonuation is furnished, or before whom any document is produced under
sub-section (1) shall at once give a written acknowledgment thereof to the per-
son furnishing or producing the same and shall endorse on any such document
a note under his signature stating the fact of its production and the date the re-
(I) Any person neglecting to make the report required by section
109, or furnish the information or produce the documents required by section
1 l8; within the specified period shall be liable, at the discretion of the [Tahsildar],
to ~ penalty not exceedin~ twenty-five rupees, which shall be recoverable as
an arrear of land revenue.
(2) Any report regarding the acquisition of any right [under section
109]3 received by the patwari after the specified period shall be dealt with in
accordance with the provisions of section noa
Subject to rules made under this Code, any Revenue
revenue inspector, measurer or patwari may, for the purpose of p~paring or
J'tl:Vi~ng any map or plan required for or in connection with any record or
regiater under thi~ Chapter, cal! upon any holder of land and any holder of plot
in abadi to. point out the boundaria of his land or plot.
The State Government may make rules for regulating the prepara-
tion, maintenance and revision of land records required for the purposes of this
122. The State Government may, by notification, direct that this Chapter
or any provisions thereof shall not apply to any specified local area or to any
I ands or any class of villages or lands.
Until a record-nf-rights for the
village~ in the Madhya
Bharat, Bhopal, Vhclhya Pradesh and Sironj region~ is prepared in accordance
1. Jn,. by M. P. Act 15 of 1971, S.S.
2. Subs. by M. P. Act 24 of 1961, S. 6, for "Collector".
Subs. by M. P. Act 25 of 1964, S.12 (a.), for "of tli~ kind n;f,rrcd to in seclirin 108."
4. Proviso omitted by S.12(b), ibid.
THE MADf!Y A PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
with the provisions of section 108 the jamabandi or kharauni of every such villa1r
for the agricultural vear as the State Government may notify shall, so far as dt
contains the particulars specified in sectian lOR, be deemed to be the recor
of--rights, for that village.
(2) The jamabandi or khatauni referred to il_l subsection (1) shall be
published in the vilbtgr ir: ouch mannrr :i.s may be c-l1rected by the Collector.
[(3) Objections may be fil~d to~y entry in Jamabandi or kh~taun!
which shall be dispostd ofby the Tahsildar m such manner as may be prescribed.]
(4J The Jnmabandi of the \·illa50.:s in the Mahakosha! region fo~ the
agricultural year [1954-55]2 shall continue to be deemed to be rec<?rd-of-nghts
of such villages until a record-of -rights is prep<1red in .:1ccorda11cc with the pro
visions of section 108,
Bonparies and Boundary Marks, Surxey Marks
Bouudaries of all villages shall lie fixed and demarcated by
The State Government may, in respect of any village by notification,
order that the bow1daries of all survey numbers or plot numbers shall also be
fixed and demareatcd by boundary marks.
Such boundary marks shall, subject to the provisions hereinafter
contained, be of such specification and shall be constructed and maintained in
such manner as may be prescribed.
Whe1e the 1 ules prescribed boundary marks of a specification different
from that prevailing in any viilage, the new ~pecifiu,,tion shall not be enforced
in such village except upon application to a [TahsildarJa made by Hot less than
half the nurnber of holders of land in the village, When such application is
made, 1he [Ta1isilclar]3 shall have new boundary marks constructed throughout
the vil!J.gc- and sha lJ d,· tribute the cost thereof proportionately am011g the holders
of la:J.d in the village ia accordance with rules made undrr tJ-.is Code. The
share of each holder shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenu.::.
Every holder of land shall be responsible for the maintenance and
repair of the permanent honndary and sllrver marks erected thereon,
All disputes regarding boundaries of villages, survey numbers and
plot numbers where such brmndaries have bren fixed under the provisions of
section 12,1-, shall be decided hy the [Tahsildar ]4 after l_ocal inquiry at which all
persons intersted shall ha,;e an opportunity of appearing and producing evidence,
(!) When a boundary has been fixed under the provisions of
section 124, the Tahsildar may summarily eject any person who is wrongfully
in possession of any land which has been found not to appertain
his holding or to the holding of any person thro'.1gh or under whom he
Where any person has been ejected from any land under the pro-
visions of sub-section (1), he may, within the period of one year from the date
of the ejectmcnt, institute a civil suit to establish his title thereto :
Provided that the Tahsildar, or any Revenue Officer a~ such, shall not
be made a party to such mit.
The Tahsildar may at any time make an order for re-distribution of
land revenue which, in his opinion, should be made as a result of the decree
I. Suh,. M. P. Act 2.5of 1964, S. 13.
2. Sub~. by M. P. Act 24 of 1%1, S 8, for "1933-.54."
3. Subs. by S, 7. ibid, for "Revenue officer".
Sub!. by, ibid, S.fi, for "Co\kctor".
marks of villa~ and 11.DVCY
numbers or plot numbers.
numbers and plqt numbet'II,
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 195}
Enforcement of repair of
boundarv or survey mark.I,
Slll'Vey numb,:-r or ,ub-<li\'islon or
Po.atty foi des1ructiou, injury
or re:,;.,oval of boundary or
in a civil suit institmcd under .,ub-scction (2),and such re-dis1ributiuJ1 bhall t.Jlc
effect from the Leginniug of the revenue year follo\,ing the date of the order.
.Every holder uJ the ]and alijO,mng ,\ \11l,1ge road villoge
wa.stL' or land reserved for comrnurnd purposes, ~hall r.t his own cost' and in
the nianncr prescribed -
(c) demarcate the boundarv between his land and village
road, villag·c waste or, land
it by boundary rr.arks: and
(b) repair and reuew
such boundary marks from
lf the holder fails to demarcate the boundary or to repair or renew
the bounchn·y marks as required Ly ~uh-section (1), rhc Tahsikl.ar may, after
such notice as he deems fit, ,·,mt;t! the boundary to be demarcated or tI'.f' bounda1y
n1ark~ to he repaired or rr-L(-wed and 1,,a,.. reco\-er the co~l iucurred as an arrear
(3) .1n the event of any dispntc rcgardiug the deman:ation of the boundary
or the mamtenance of tlic hounda,y mark5 in propcr ~late c,f repair, the matter
shall he decirlcd b'v the Collecto, whose dt>ci~ion shall be final.
ro:,d fur the purpoes nf tl1is ~ecti('J1 mean~ a
road which, he,1rsa11 iridicative sun'C~' nun,bt>r or plm nun~ber.
A.flcr Lite end of:1\'ovcmber in each year rl·e fMtd of tht> village
shall give written notice lo e\'O'V holder on whose !and 1hr boundary or surn:y
to put them into proper repair
before the first day of 1farch following.
Afo:r Lhc lint day of l\1an:h in :my year, the Tahsildar or any othc1
Revenue Officer empowered to a,:t may cause ai1y defective l)ounda~, or rnrvey
marks to he propcrIY 1·epairecl and shall recover the cost of such rep,ui from the
holder or holders ;csponsihle for the maintenance of such boundary or survey
m:trh, together with a rwndty which n,avt>.xtenc'. to one rupee for every bonndry
mark so repaired- Such cost and penalty shall he
re<'.oyerahlc a~ an arrear
illi.\' other RcYentw Officer empowcrfd
a!)9]ication 0f a part\'
boundaries of a sur-Ycv number or of a suh-di\·i~ion
and construct bnnnd~ry m;,rb thcn-O'> ..
Th,: State Gove1nment ma\· makt rule~ for regulatill).'; the procc~nre
to be followed by 1he 1".thsildar or ~ny other Revenue Offictt en_ir~o.wercc
act in demarcating the boundaries of survey number or or a sub-dw1sion or of
a plot number prescribing the nature of the bound.::i.ry marks to be ust>d, and
authorising the levy of fh·s from the holders of ]and in .::i. ckrnarcated survey
number or sub-di\'ision or p\01 number.
Ifmy person wi!fuHY !le~truvs or iHjure,,. OJ' witb,ntlawful aurb;ritx
rtmov~s. a buun<lary or sur,,ey ~ark 1a'wfully constructed, he ma; he or erL h
by the Tahsildar or any other Revenue offiu·r rmpowercll to act to pay sue:
i1e. 'lot ~reer-hn,'.; fifty rnpces for each mar· so ut"~troyc . n1.1ure
as mav, in tile opinion of the Tahsilcbr or am.- other Revenue officer empowen-
to act'be necessary to clt'frny th,: expense of r~st 0 riHg thC" ~amc am-l. of rewarding
In the event ofo di~pult' an~in:r a~ to the rourr by whicl-: a
culti\·ator shall have acce~, to his fields or to the waste or pasture lanrl_s of t.ht>
vilbgc, othe-v·ise t~~n hy the r("crr.;niscd ror.d~. paths or common land. mclud;ng ·
th0>e roilc1 rm<l p;,_t],~: r.,,0rdPrl in th(" vil!:ir:r" \'\"aiih-ul-ar:- pr<'pared under se·C"t1on
2-~2 or as to the ~0urcc from or course by which he mav avail himself of water.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1~::59
a Tahsildar may, after lond enquiry, decide the maltcr with 1:efcrcucc tu the
previous· custom in each case and wid1 <lue rcg,trd to the convemenccs of all the
No order pas,.~cd uJtder this section ~lrnU
d~b;:ir any_ 1:erso_11 from
estahlishin" such ,·i,,hts of eascn1eHl as he mav a chum by J. civil smt.
[132. · Any person who u1u oachcs upon, or , a uses airy obstruction to th,_.
use of a recognised road, pa th or comm on laJJ d of a village including ti 10?:: _ roads
and paths recorded in the villuge vVajib-ul-urz or ,,.,ho disobeys the ~ec1~1on of
a Tahsildar pa~sed uude1 ~t.-ctio.u 131, shall be liable, under the wntten or~er
of a Tahsildar statiug the facts and circumstances of the case, to a penalty which
may extend to one -thousand rupecs.7 I
If a Tahsildar finds that anv (,hstack impedes the lice me of a
recognised road, path 01 common land oi· a village or impedes the road or
waler cour~c or source of water which has been the subject of a decision under
sectiou 13 J , he may order lhe person resp omiblc fni-
such obstacle to remove
it, and, if sucli person fails to comply with the order, may cause the obstacle
to Le removed and may
person the cost of removal
Any person who encroachts upon or Cclu.,cs any obstruction under
sectiom 131, 132 or 133 may uc reqnired by tl1e Tahsilcbr to executea per~o-
nal bond fol' sud1 sum not exceeding: five hum.ired rupees, .ts h,'. may deem fit,
for abstaining from repetition of such ru:r.
133 _ ( l)
1f~ o_;:; the application nf the villagers or otherwise, the
is,after cnq uir y, sa 1 isiied that it is expedient to acquirf' any land
for the purpose of providing a road 11ot nce~cling
feet in width cart
track or path for tht- use of tht: village <:Ornmunity in such village he1n;,y cali
upon the residents of the vilJage to deposit
payable in respect of such land m1dcr sub-section (3) within a specified period.
On such deposit being made the Collc\'tor rm1y,
bv order published in th
prescribed manner, acquire such land and upor1 the ~iaking of such or dcr, such
land shall vest absoluteh· in the State Government.
. (2) . Any person claiming any interest in
any such land may within
penod of one year from the date of vesting under sub-section (1) make an
application to the Colh:ctor for compensation in respect of' his interest.
The compensation payable in respect of such land shall be fifteen
titncs the land J'CVenuc J.sscssed or asses~able thereon.
The State Government may, by notification, declare dtat any of
or a~l of the provisio11~ of this Chapter shali not ,1,pply VJ any village or class
Realisation of Land Revenue
The laud revenue a~scssed on .. :rn· bnd shall be fir.~t ch8r1s·c or,
that land and on the rent,; anrl profits thcr~of.
The following person 8 hall be primarily 1 ia Lie for the payrnen t
of the land revenue asses.5ed on a lwlrling--
(11). in a Bhumiswarni's · holdin~ the Bhurniswami ;,
in a holding consisting of land leased. by the
Government the lessee thereof.
!vf. l'_ Act 15 of 1930, S. 7.
Penalty for obstruction of way,
F.:x~cufo>n of hond for a~tai-
ning frmn repnition of certain
Acquisition <lf land for road,
Power to e:<empl from operation
Land Revenue fo'!lt cba.rgt:
Rcspoll~ibility for payinent (?(
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Land revenue recoverable from
any penon, in ~ion.
Dato on which lanJ. revenue
fulli due and i!! payable.
Definitions of "arrear" and
Patel_, Patwari, Gram Sabha or
Gran1 Pancbayac bound to
Penalty for drfault ofpaymo:nt
Remi.i:on or su1pension of
\tVh_en the:rc are more than one Bhumiswami or 'Jessee in a holding,
all ~uch ,B!rnrmswanns or lessees, as the case may be, shall be jointly and
~cverall} lublc to the pa. ymen t of t11e land 1-et·enuc as~essed on such holding.
_. . 139. In case of default by ,my_ person v.·ho is primarily
sectlon 138,. the land revenue, mcludmg arrears, ~hall
any person m posseession of the land :
Provided that sue h person ~hall be en ti 1kd to
tl1 e am ouu l
recovered from him in account with the person \1·h o is primarily liable.
(I) The land rev en uc payable on ace oun t of a rn en ue ) ear ~hall
fall due on the first day of that year.
The State Government may m:1ke rules providing fur the payment
0 ~ land revenue in instalments and or; dates {Jl<"reinafrcr 1·cferrcd to as pre,-
cnbed dates) subsequent to thf' first dav of the revenue vear, and such rules
may prescribed the persons to whom an'd the places whe're a·t such instalments
The paymt'J1 t of land rcYenut: to the pcr~on pre~lriLcd undtT sub-
section (2) may be made in ca~h or n1.1y, at the cost of the rcmittcr, be remi-
tted by money order.
Any period clap~ing het,.1·een the fir:-t c!ay cf il e reY,m:c ye;,:ir znd
any date fixed for the payment of land revenue by such rules shall he deemed
to be a pcri od of grace, and shall not affcc t the provfri orn of sub-,cction (I).
14 I. Any land revenue due and not paid on c,r before the prt>;{ rib( d
date becomes tht-refr"m an arrear, and the p.-rsons responsihle for it, whed1cr
under the provisions of sec tioi 1 138 or sec Li 011 I 59 become def:.i.ulters.
\ Vhcrc a Pa tel, Pat wa ri, Gr,1 m Sa l,ha or Gram Pandrn ya t
receives a payment from ;i_ny {lf'TcOn on ~1ccount c,f Lind revt-nuc or on a,ceiunt
of anv snm of n1oaey recuver:-1 !J]e as an arrear nf fruid
grant' a receipt for su;:h sum in the prescribed form.
If any Patel, Patwari, Gr;,:im Sabha or Gram Panchayat
give a receipt as req uircd by s nb-Sf'C ti nn ( 1) sue h pa tel, pat wari or in the case
of Gram Sabha or Gram Panchayat tl1e persons respom,ible for pa,.,ing· such
receipt on behalf of s11ch Gram Sabha or Gr:c·rn PancLayat, as the cacc may
be, shall, on applieation of the Fayer, be liabk by an ordn of the Tahcildar
to.pay a penalty not exceeding double the amount paid.
If any instalment of land revenue or any part thereof is not paid
within one rnonth after tl1e presnibed date the Sub-divisjonal Officer may
in the <:ase of a wilful defaulter, impo~e penalty nnt exceeding ten per cent of
the amount not so paid :
Provided that no such penalty ~hall he imr,,~f"d fc·r the nor,-rayn-ent of
any instalment, tb~ payment of \\hidi has been
su,rended l,y th: order of
Government, in r:espect of the period during whid1 the payment remained
{l) The State Governmcn t may grant remission or suspension of
land revenue in vears in which crops have failed in anv area or in which
crops could not 'be grown in any area in consequence' of any order made
under any law by a competent authority, and mch remission or suspension
iliall be determined in accordance with rules made under thi~ Cod~.
No appeal or revision shall lie against any order p.8.ssed by a Revenue
Officer w1der such rules and no suit shall lie in a Civil Court to contest any
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
(I) A statement of accouHt, certified by the Collector or by
Tahsildar shall, for the pm poses of this Chapter, be presumed to be correct
statement of the arrears payable to Government or it~
<'mount: and of the
person who is the defaulter, uritil the contrary is prow·d.
Certifcd account to be evid-
rnce as to arrear and defaulter.
No notice to defaulter shall be necessary
before drawing up the
statement nfcrred tu m sub-section (IJ.
A Tahsildar or Naib-Tahsildar may cawe a notice of
to be served on any defaulter before the issue of any proces~ under section
147 for the recovery of an at rear.
An arrear of land revenue payble to Govc:·mnent may he reco-
vered by a Tahsildar by any one or more of the follo"ing prncc~~co:--
by att.1-chmcnt and sale ofmovab]~ property;
by attachment and sale of the holding on which arrear i~ due
and \vhere such holding consist of more than
number or plot number by sale of one or more of such
survey nurnhers, or plol nun,bers as may be considered
necei,sary to recover the arrears;
by attachment of holding
and letting the same under section 154A;
other holding belonging to the
for the purposes of agri::uture
and letting the same under section 154-A;] 1
by attachment and sale of any other immovable property
belonging to the defaulter ;
Provided that the processes ~pecifie<l in cl,iusc~ (a) and (c) shall not per-
mit the attachment and sale of the following, namely:-
the necessary wearing appearel, cooking ve~sals, beds,
and beddin~ of the defaulter, his wife and children, and
such personal ornaments as,
religious usage, cannot be parted with by any woman;
tools of artisans and, if the defaulter i~ an agriculturist,
his implements of husbandry, excrpt an implement
driven by mechanical poWcr and snrh cattle and seed as
may, in the opinion of the Tah~ildar, be necessary to
enable him to earn his livelihood as such;
articles set aside cxclmivdy for the use of t"eligious end-
house and other buildings /with the materials and the sites
thereof and the land immediately appurtenant thereto and
necessary for the enjoyment) belonging to an agriculturist
and occupied by him:
[Provided further that the process specified in dausc (bJ shall not permit
attachment and ~ale of holding where the defaulter holds,-
(i) six hectares or less than six hectares of land in the Scheduled
(ii) four hectares or less than four hrrtarcs of land in other area
Esplanation.- For the purpose of this proviso,
means any area declared to be Sc~eduled Area within the State of Jviadhya
Pradesh under paragraph 6 of the Fifth Schedule to the Crn1stitution of India.] 1
l-48. The co~t of serving a
notice of demand nnder section 146 or of
is:ruing and enforcing any process in section 147 shall be recoverable as part of
the arrear in re~oect of which the notice was served or the process wa~ issued,
1. !n,. by M. P. Act I of 1971, S.2.
2, IM by M P .Act. 9 to 1977, S. 2.
l'roces, for r~covery of arn:ar.
Colts recoverable as pall f
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, l9~N
Payment under prott;;t and
The processes sp:Tified ir1 cl<1ust~ \a) and (r) of ~ectiou I47 may
be enforced either ii, the district in which the deil,uit has been made or in any
( l) If pnoct·cuiugs ;1~e u,) en under this Chap1er ag.,irnt aiiy r-,crson
for the recovery of an arrcnr of ,aud revenue, he may, at any tirne before the
propr,rty i_s knoc~ed dmrn at ~ sale, pay t11e amotmt claimed and may, at
the same time, deliver n protest signed by Jii1melf or by J1is authorised agent
to the Revenue Officer taking ,uch proa·edings, and thereupon they shall
Any JlCfWH c,·mplyb.11~ "- ith the provision.~ of i:ub-sect:ion (1) may,
i10twithstanding anythin~, cordained in section 145, applv to tlu, SuL-DivisiC'rial
Officer that nothing wa;. due or th~t thf' amount due w~s lees th311 the amovnt
for the recovery of which proccc<li11gs \teie wJ-;en
Offieer ~hall decide the o~jection so rajs('d.
:Ko appe-,al sl':'!! lw ag.1in.~t the urrJ1:,r (,f tht· Sub-Li\s!or,al Officer
(2), l-,i,1 Lht per50n cor.uTJie<l n:ay institute a civil
snit for the recovery of the sum or 11art thcn,cf paid undu protest.
Application ofprooccds of sale.
(I) The proceed~ of every sale under tl1i~ Chapt<:r shall be applied,
l.aml 50,h'i for arrears to t,c,
:,,.c from ,u, '''"Lm,w . .s
PntcbalS<""c 11ot liabll- for laud
n,.,cnu,. due prior to sale.
Powr-rs of th,. Tahsilda:- 1,, kt
out thr holding in respect of
which arrear i~ due or any
other hold in.'\ of the ddaulter,
firstly, in s;ifo;faction of the arrerirs on account of which the ~ale was held and
of the expenses of such ~ale, secf'ndly. to the p:-i;rr·cnt of <'l!"Y ,i.rrears cf cesscs
due bY the df'fanlt,~r unrler a..'1.y law f,1r the time being in force in the region
conce~ned. 1hirdly, to tJ,e payD,ent of an'" 01hn :srr<·ar, rayablc t0 the State
Government hy the defimlt,;,r. and fourthly to the payment of any arrean; due
h-y the rlcfaultcr to :-i Co-operative Society, and the snrplus, i.f 8ny. shall then
he p<1yal-:ilc to him. or where then <'re more dcfaultrrs than
defaulter~ ;i.ccorrling: to their reso.-ctive ~hare~ in th<"" property sold
Providerl that tlic surplus shall not be paid to the rlefaultcr or defaulters
until after the cxnin· of t.1·o month~ from
the date of the sale in the ra~e of
movabk propertv ;..r from thf'" rlatf' of the ronfirm,itinn of sale in the cafe of
.N"otwith~t~llrlim., nny1J-,:JJ~ in rnb- 8ection (1), die r,ro!t"cd:. of rnlc
under clause (c) of ~f'rtj..-.,1 14':' ,;1,~11 he 8pplicd fint to the payment of arrears
ofland revenue payabic by the defaulter for the irnmovable_property ~old up
to the <late of the ;ale, 8-n<l the mrplus, if ,1ny. ~holl he npphed in ar·corrbm:e
lJnles.s 1r.cSub-1Jivi.ic,nal Cfi..(<T n nr1krin/s rhe sak otherwise
directs, purch,;~er of the land ~old f0r arrc2r~ of land 1c\·enuc d1'<' in respect
thereof. shall acquite it frc("" of all cncumLrances imposed on it, ai~d nll grant5
and c0ntracts madr- ;H respect ()fit. by any pi:--rson other than the purch2 ser.
Any transfer grnnt or contrncl in ri·spcrt of trees or th_e pro~luc_e of
treC's whil'h are 01· at r,ny ·time have bttn the property of the Rh11rn1sw~rn1 dof thf.
land ln which thev ~,tand. shall he drerned to be a grant or contract ma e in
resJ:Wart of rnch la~d '1-l"ith;n thr ml'.";:ning of sub-Rection (\'.
VVhere immovablc property is sold under the provisions of this
Chapter and such sale bas become .ibsolute. the property ah::ill he def"m~d to
have ve:;tcd in the purcha~er from tlK tim<' vhf'"n thr pro1wr1y i, sold anc. not
from the time when the sak becomes ahsolntf".
Notwithstanding anything iu section !3f'>, <Jr section 139, the pi-non
named in the ccrtificatc of purChase- ·sball not hf" liable for lnn(l revenue pay-
able in respect of the fond for ,my pe-riod prn,ious to the- dak of the sak.
[1.)4  A.(l) \rl;erc the aircar of Jam] rcvcm:c i~ d11e ii: respect of ::i hold-
inii; or where any money i~ rec("".n:rab1e in the '.:rrt'" m2nnrr as :1n arrear of land
revcrme u 11dey ~cct!on 155, the T;i.l1sildar may, notwi1b!itJidiJ1g- anything con-
tc1ineil in this ('!ode, :i.ftf'r i!lt:'d.:rr.r:-n1 nfth<" l:ol<lin~ 1,nder d2u~c (l,b; or dau.o;c
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENU.E CODE, 1959
(bbb) of sectiun 141, a~ the cat;e z:iiay be, let out the hol~ing_ on which arrear JS
due or any other ho1G.ing belonf;mg to the <lefaultt-r which 1~ me<l fo1 _the pur~
po~ of arrriculturc to any person other than the dc.faulter for a period not
exceedinp;" ten year!l commencing from th:- first day of agricultural year next
following, upon such term~ and condit;on~ as the Collector mav fix.
Nothing in this Slc(_'tion, !'.hall affec1 the liability of any person who
may be liable under this Code for the p<rymclll of the arrear~ of land revenue
or of any money recovcn1bk ;n th· s.un1c manner as an airear of land revenue
Upon the expiry of the pe-riod of lease tLe holding shall l:e restored
to the persor. concerned f,ee of any claim on tI'c rnt r;f t.h.e- S12-tc Governrrcnt
for the arrears in respect of ~t.ch Lolding er free of an; cfoim OJ> the par! of the
State Government or nnv otht't authority \\J-,2.t ~cevrr fer the" rr r-ncvs recnw:r-
able in the ~ame rnanne~ as an arrear of land reven1te unde1 section fo5 for the
satisfaction whnc of the sarnr was let out under sub-section (l).]1
The following rronrys may lie reco\·ered, as fer as may lie, Wldt>r
thr provi~ions of this (h"pter in the sarr,e manner 2s an arrear of land rev(:nue :-
except such charges as are included in the land revenue
sub-section (2) of section 58, ail rents, royalties, water
ra tcs, cesses, fees, charges, premia, pem1lties, fines and cost
payable or leviablc unlli'r th~ Code or any olher enactment for
the time being in force:
all moneys falling due to the St:Jte Government w1<ler any
grant, lca~e or cor.tract which provides that they shall be
recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue· ,
[(bb) al_! moneys guaranteed by the Stak Go1,-ernrr,ent to the e.xtent
of a~o-unt guaranteed under a contract of guarantee which
provides that they ~h<·ll he recoverable in the same manner
as an arrear of land revenue;}1
aH si:ms det;lared by this Code, ur any
the time bemg in force to be recovcrablA ·
'- 1n t e same manner
as an arrdtr of land revenue;
(d'., . any ~um ordered by a liquidator appointed
'.'elating to. Co-operative Societies in force for the 1irne' being
rn any reg-ion of tlte State to be recovered as a contribution
to the assets of ~ societ,.- or as the cost of liquidation :
Pn,;ided. that no action shall be taken on application for recovery of a
sum ~p~c1fied Ill clause (f), unless s1:ch applicati<m is ~ccornpankd by a certi-
ficate signed by the Registrar appomte<l under such law that the sum should
he recovered as an arrear of land revenue:
r (,J all moneys becomiiig payable
10 the Madhva Pradesh State
on account of. penalty, CUit of agricultural implt>mr-,.n.ts
or . other materials sold by the Corporation to agricul-
turists for the purpo~e of agriculture or improvement of
!and . or otherwise,
any agreernen t of sale
such implements or materials by the said Corporation;
(ii'i in _repayment of any loan advanced hy the ~aid Co-rpo-
rat,on or of any amount due to the said Corporation
u:1r::ler an~ lease,contract, or agreement with or any
other dealmg- of the said Corporation :
fm.hy}.f.P.Act l of197l S.3,
In,. by ~f. P. An 9 of 1 Q](I, S. 2(:..).
arrear of land rcw::mr;;
/HE Mt\DHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
Pro~ided. that _no actioH shall be taken on application for recovery of
a s~ spec!fied 111 this clause, unless .such
application is accompanied by a
cerbficate signed by the Managing D1recwr of the ~aid Corporation that the
sum should be recovered as an arrear of land revenue;] 1
[(J) ap mone~s becon:iin_g payable to the Madhya Pradesh Laghu
Udyog N"1gam Lmuted and the Madhya Pradesh
(i) on ac_count of service drnrge, penalty, interest, cost of
rnachmery or other materials sold by the ~id Nigams
to enterprenurs for the purpo~e of establishini:;, expa.-
ndi:1g or running an industry or for any other purpo:s.-:
ancrJlary to an industry
under any agreement of sale
on hire purchaSe or otherwise of ~uch machinery or
. . materials by the said Nigams;
(n) on account of rent or cost of huilding hired out or sold,
as the case may he, by the said Nigams under any lea~e,
(iii) in repayment of any loan advanced by the said Nigams~
or of any amowlt clue tO the
said Nigams wider any
lease, contract or agreement with or any other dealing
of the said Nigarns :
Pro~ided !hat no action· shall be taken on application for recovery of a
sum specified 1n this clause unless such application is accompanied by a certi-
fical'e signed by the l\fanaging Director of the said Nig-am that the said sum
should be recovered as an arrear of land revenue: '·
(g) all moneys becoming payalble
to the Madhya Pradesh Lift
Irrigation Corporation Limited on account of-
(i) construc:tion charges of the tube-wells;
(ii) water rates for the water supnlicri for the purpose of irrigation
from any Lift Irrigation Schemes;
(iii) any sum due to the ~aid Corporation under any lease, agree-
ment or coutract executed with the said -Corpora ticm:
Provided that no action shaU be taken on application fo1' recovery of a
:sum specified in this clause unlf:ss such application is accompanied by a certi-
ficate signt:d by the ).-fanaging Director of the said Corporation that the said
,um should be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.]1 .
who may have become a surety under any of the
provisions of this Code or under anv other enac:tment or any grant, lease or
contract whereundcr the sum secured is recovf:rable from the principal as an
arr~ar of land revenue shall, on failure to pay the amount or an)". portio~ thereof
which he may have beci,me liable to pay under the terms of his security boncl,
he liable to be proceeded against under the provisions of this Code in the same
manner as for an arrear of land revenue,
151. There shall be only one cJass of tenure-holders of land! held from
the State to be known as Bhumi!'.warni.
158. [IJ Every person who at the time of coming into C~rce oC,thi~ Code,
·belong.~ to any of the following c!asse!I shall be called a Bhum1sw?m1 and shall
-have all the rights and he subject t() an the liabilities conferred or imposed upon
a Bhumiswami by or under this Code, namely:-
{a) every person in v:mect of land held by him !n t~e Maha-
koshal region in Rhumiswami or Bhumidhar1 nghts in
accordance with the provisions of the Madhya Pradesh
Lanrl Rev~nue Code,· 1954 (II of 1955);
I. Subs. by M. P. Act 30 ofl973, S. 2.
2. Added by M. P. Act 16 of 1979, S.2.
3. Renumbered by M.P. Act. 8 of 1979 S. 3.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
every person in respect of land held by him !n the Madhya
l:iharat region as a Pakka tenant or as a 1-luafidar, lnamdar
or Concessiom,l holder, as defined in the :Madhya Bharat
Land Revenue and Tenancy Act, Samvat 2007 (66 or
every person in respect of land held by him in the Bhopal
region as an occupant as
defined in the Bhopal State
1932 (IV of I 932);
(i) every person in respect of land held by hi~ in the
Vindhya Pradesh region as a pachapan pamtalis tenant,
pattcdar tenant; a grove holder or as
tank as defined in the Vindhva Pradesh Land Revenue
and Tenacy Act, 1953 ( 111· of 1955 ) ;
(it) every person in respect of land. (ether than land
grover or tank or wh,~h has been ac~~
uircd or which is ,equired for Gc 0.r,:rnmcnt or pubhc
purposes) held by him in the Vindhya P:·ad;:-sh region
as a gair haqdar tcr~ant and in rc1pect of whk_h, he
is entitlt:d to a patta m accordance with the prov1s1ons
of sub-section 1 ,J) of section 5 7 o.f the Rev,a State Land
Revenue and Tenancy Cod::, LS5,
(iii) every person in respect of land held by him as a tenant
in the ·v indh ya Prad:osh region and iu respect of whic~
he is entitled to a natta in accordance with the prov1·
sions of sub scction~(2'l n.nd (31 of section l 5 l of the
Vindhva Pradeoh ·L:inrl Rc~·enue and Tenancy Act,
1953 (III ofl955), Lut has omitted to obtain such patta
before the coming into force of tliis Code,
(e) every person in respect of land h:,ld by him in Sironj
region as a khatedar tenant or as a grove holder as defined
in the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 195:f (3 of 1955).
[(2) A Ruler of an Indian State forming part of the State of Madhya
Pradesh W?o, at the t,ime of coming into force of this Codi:'., was holding land
or was ~nlitlcd to_ hokt land as such Ruler by virtue of the covenant or agreement
cnterd mto by him before the commencement of the Constitution, shall, as
from the date of coming into force of this Code, be a Bhumiswami of such
land under the Code and shall be subject
to all the rights and liabilities
conferred and imposed upon a Bhumiswami by or under t!iis Code.
Es:planatiou.- Ill this sec ti en.
e> rrn,; <:T "F 1 !er" :and "Indian
State" shall-have the same meanings as arc assigned to these expressions in
clall.';es (22) and (15) respectively of article 3€6 of the Constitution of lndia.] 1
Every person becoming a Bhumiswami under section 158 shall
Land revenue payable by
pay as land revenue.--
(") if he was paying land revenue in respect of the lands held by him-
fa,. J revenue ; or
{b) ii"i1e was paying rent in respect of the land5 held by him-an amount
.~-~'..;:'.l.t to such rent.
Every 11,fuafi or Inam land. wherever situate, which was hereto..
revenue by a special grant from the Government or under the provisiont of any
law for the time bein!; in force oi- in pursuance of anv other instrument shall,
notwith~tanding- anvthing contained in anv such ~aiit, law or instrument be
liable from the corr{mcn~~ment of the revc11ue yea~ next follov,,ing the coming
into force of thh Code. to the payment of full iand revenue a~~~able thereon.
Im. by M. P. Act 8 of 197
RcvocHtion of c-xemption from
liability for land tt.YenllC.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Reduction of revenue during
tile curnucy of settlement.
Where any such l\..fuafi or Inam land is held for the maintenance or
upkeep of any public religious or charitable institution, the State Gcverr,n.ent
m.ay,_ on the ~pplication 7r such i~tstitution, in th.e prcscrib<"d_furm [and m2.d(."
w1thm such time as may u_e prcscnbed] 1 grant to It such annutty not exceeding
t(1e amount of the exemptron from l~nd revenue er~oyed by it, as may be con-
sidered reasonable for the proper maintenance or upkeep of such institution or
ror the continuance of service rendered by it.
(3) The annuity gr.anted under sub-section (2) shall be subject to such-
conditions as may be prescribed and may from time to time be revi5ed or with
drawn by the State Government.
Where an applicaion. is made under sub-section (2), the recovc1y
of land revenue from the institution concerned shall be stayed until the decision
At any time during the currency of the settlement the CoUector
may, in accordance with such rules as may be made in this behalf, on the ap-
plication of a Bhumiswarni or of hi: own motion reduce the revenue in respect
of any land on any of the followmg grounds, namely:-
( i) that the land has been wholly or partially rendered
unfit for cultivation in consequence of floods or other
cause beyond the control of such Bhumiswami;
(ii) that any irrigation source, \\hether new or old, constru-
cted and maintained at the cost of the State has fallen
into disrepair and has ceased to irrigate the whole or any
part of his holding to which an enhanced rate of revenue
has been applied on account of irrigation;
(iii) th ... t any private irrigation source has for any cause
beyond the control of Bhurniswarni, ceased to irrigate
the whole or any part of the holding which has been
to enhanced land revenue on account
(iv) that the revenue payable by th<' Blmmiswan,i in respect
of the land is more than the revenue calculated. at the
rate fixed at the last settlement or under any other Jaw
{v) that the area of the holding of such Bhumiswami has
decreased for any reason below the area on which the
existing land revenue was assessed.
\\.'here any reduction is ordered under sub-section (I), such reduc-
tion shall take effect from the commencement of the revenue year next following
the date of the order.
(3) If the cause for whir.h revenue has been reduced under sub-section
(1) subsequently ceases or is removed, the Collector may, after giving the Bhumi-
swami a reasonable opportunity of being heard, make an order directing that
such reduction shall cease to be in force and on such order being passed, the
reduction shall stand revoked from the commencement of the revenue
nextfollowingthe date of the order.
All applications by Bhumidharis for conferral of Eimmiswami
rights pending before any revenue court in the Mahakoshal region immediately
before the coming into force of this COde whether in appeal, revision, review ~r
otherwise, shall be filed and the amount, if any, deposited by such Bhumidhans
shall be refunded to them.
1. Irle. by M. P. Act 24 of 1961, S.9.
2.. Omitted by M. P. Act 25 of 1964, S. l.f.
THE MAI>H.YA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
[164. Subject to his personal law the interest of Bhumiswami shal1, on
..... his death, pass by inheritauce, survivorship or bequest, as the case may be.] 1
Subject to the other provisions cf this section and the provision
of section 168 a Bhumiswami may transfer [ -
interest in his land.
(2) Notwithstand.ing .anything contained in sub-sectic1'. (1)-
(a) no mortgage of any land by a Bhumiswami shall hereafte~ h;
valid unless atlcast five acres of irrigated or ten acres of umrn-
gated land is left with him free
from any encumbrance or
(b) subject to the
mortgage of any land by a Bhum,swami shall hereafter be valid
if it is for- a period exceeding six years and unless it is a condition
of the mortage that on the expiry of the period mentioned in
the mortgage deed, the mortga~c shall be deemed, without
any payment whatsoever by the Bhurniswami to have been redee-
med in full and the mortgagee shall forthwith re-deliver posses-
sion of the mortaged land to the Bhumiswami;
(c) if any mortgagee in possession of the land mortgaged does
not hand over possession
of land after the expiry of the
period of the mortgage or six years whichf.'ver expires first
the mortgagee shall be liable to ejectment by the orders of
the Tahsildar as trespasser and tJ1e mortgagor shall be placed
in possession of the land by the Tahsildar ;
[Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in the case of a
mortgage of any land held by a Bhumiswa..mi for non-agricultural purpose.sJ
Where a Bhumiswami effects a mortgage other than a usufructuary
mortgage of his land in pursuance of the provisiomi of sub-sectjon (2), then
., · notwithstanding anything contained in the mortgage deed, the total amount
'· of interest accruing under the mortgage shall not exceed half the sum of the
principal amount :advanced by the mortgagee.
Notwithstanding anything containrd i1~ sub-rectior (1), no :BJ-11mi-
1wami shaH have the right to transfer ~ny land-.
(a) in favour of any person who shall as a result of the transfer
become."" entitled to land which together with the land, if any,
hdd by himself or by his family will in the aggregate exceed
:such ceiling limits as may be prescribed;
nothing in this sub-:section shall apply-
(a) in the case of a transfer in favour of a Co-operative Society
or an institution established for a
charitable purpose or a tr2.nsfer for industrial purpose or a
transfer by way of mortgage;
( b) in the case of a transfer of · Ian d held for · non agricultural
Subs. by M. P. Act 38 of 1961, S .2.
Word, ''otherwi,e man by will'' omitted by S.3(i); itid.
Added by M. P. Act 24 of Ukil, S. lO(i).
Ocnitted by M. P. Act 25 of 1964, i,,.15.
Subs. by M. P. Acl 2-4 of 1961, S. 10 (ii).
Omitlcd by ~LP. Ad 25 of 1964, 5.15.
TIIB MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Provided further that the transfer of Jand under sub~dause (a) of clause
(1) of the prececding proviso tbr an industrial purpose shall be subject lo thC...,;.
following conditions, r>amely :-
if such land is to be diverted to a non-agricultural purpose,
the permission of the Sub-Divisional Cfiicer under section
l 72 for such diversion is obtained prior to such transfer;
the provisions of section 172 shall apply to
with the modification that the period of three months and six
mo:1ths mentioned in the prov;so to sub-section (1) thereof
shall, for the pui·poses of an application for such diversion,
be forty-five days and ninety days, respectively.]
Exp~anation..- For the purposes of this snh-~ection, a person's family
shall consist of the person himself, the minor children and the spouse of such
person living jointly with him and if such person is a minor then his patents
li,,ing jointly with him.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other enactment
for the time being in force, no land of a Bhumiswami shall, in execution of a
d~cree or order of.a court, be sold to any person who as a result of such sal': shall
become entitled to land which together with the land, if any, held by himself
or by his family will in the aggregate exce~d such ceiling limits as may be
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in the case of a co-
operative society where any land is put to sale in execution of a decree or order
passed in favour of such society.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section, the expres~ion "a
person's family'' shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in sub-section (4)-
1 [(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
ofBhumiswami belonging to a tribe which has been declared to be an aborigmal
tribe by the State Government by a notification in that behaJf, whole for the
or part of the area to which this Code applies ~ha1l.-
in such areas as are predominately inhabitated by aboriginal
tribes and from such date as the State Government may, by
y, not he t1 ansferred nor it ~haH be transfe-
rable either by way of sale or otherwise or as a. consequence
loan to a person not belongmg to sud:
ribe in the area specified in the notification;
(ii) in areas other than those specified in the notifi:-ation uru]er
clause (i), not he transferred or he transferahie either ~y way
of sale or o~herv,.,ise or as a
comeouencc of tranmct10n of
loan to a person not helongfo!!' to ;uch tribe without the
Revenue Officer not below the rank of
Collector. given for reasons to be recorded in writin1.
E:11:planation- For the purposes of this mb-section the expression .. otha-
~se,. shall not inclnde 1ea5c,J
Notwithstanding anythin!! eon t.iined in rnb-!'ecti<'n (1), [the ri,r:h t
of a Rhumiswami other than a Bhumi~wami bdonf!jn~ .to a tribe
which has heen declared to be an abori!tlnal tribe under su~section
1. Suhs. by M. P. Act 61 of 1976., S.2.
In,., in it!! applir.ation to thr. Scheduled
· ,s. by Government of Madhya PradC!!h, Adi-
mj"ti Avam Harijan Kalyan Vibha~ Notiticatinn No. F-16"1-81-Il-XXV, dared the J5t.h
April, 1981, issued by thc-
ernor of Madhya Pradesh· under ,ub-paragra.ph (I) of para-
graph 5 of lhe Fifth Schedule to the Con,tituticm of India, published in Madhya Pra-
a Asadbaran), dated the 20th April, 1981, pagei 627-6!12,
THE MADH't'A PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
{6), in the land excluding the agricultural land]1
transferred or be transferable eithe1 by ·way of sale or otherwise or
as a conseq_uence of transaction of loan to a person not bdon~ing
to aboriginal tribe without the permission of the Collector given
for reasons to be recorded in writing :
Provided that every such transfer effected pnor to the 9th day of June,
1980 which is not in accordance v,r::h the provisions herein contained shall,
unless such transfc .. is ratified by the Collector in accordance with the provisions
he.-einafter contained, be void and shall be ofno effect whatsoever~ notwithstanding
anything contained in this Code or any other law for the time being in force.
(6-b) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Llmitalion Act, 1?63
(No. 36 of 1963), the Collector may on his own motion at any time
or on an application made in this behalf within three years of such
transaction in such form ru; may be prescribed, make an enquiry
as he may deem fit, and may, after giving a reasonable opportunity
of being heard to the persons affected by the transfer, pass an order
ratifyjng the transfer or refusing to ratify the transfer.
(6-c) The Collector shall, in passihg a..'l order under sub-section (6-a)
granting or refusing to grant permission or under sub-section (6-b)
ratifying or refusing to ratify the transaction shall have due regard
to the following :-
(i) whether or not the person to whom land is being transferred
is a rcsiden t of the Scheduled Area;
(ii) the purpose to which land shall be or is likely to be used after
(iii) whether the transfer serves, or is likely to serve or prejudice
the social, cultural and economic interest of the residents of
(iu) whether the consideration pa1d is adrquate;
whether the transaction is spurious, fictitious or benami; and
(vi) such other matters as may be prescribed.
The decision of the Collector granting or refusing to grant the penniaaion
under sub-section (6-a) or ratifying or refusing to ratify the transaction of tran!f'er
under sub-section (6-b), shall be final, notwi thi,tanding anything to the contrary
contained in thi!, Code.
Ezplanation.-For the purpose of thh sub-section,-
(a) "'Schedulr:d Arca'' m:ians ,my area declared to be a Sched
uled Area within the State of Madhya Pradesh
paragraph 6 of the Fifth Scheduled to the Constitution
(h) the bnrden of proving that the transfer was not spurioUI,
fictitious or benami shall lie on the person who claima
such traasfer to be valid.
{6-d) '?? refosal to grant the permission
under sub-section (6-a) or
ratihcati:on under sub-section (6-b), the tra11sferee1 if in possmion of
the land shall vacate the passe~sion forthwith
possession thereof to the original Bhumiswami,
Sub9. in its apnlication he Scheduled Ar~a. bv Government or Madhya Pt'adesh Revenue
Department's Notificarion F. No. 37-4-VU-N-11-84. dated the 4th June, 1984, for the
words, figure and bracl:('tS "th<' rfr.;ht of a Bhuminr.ami oth('r than a Bhumiswami bclon
fin~ tr,"' tr,ht' wl,i,h 1,,., 1-,,., . ., ,!, ,-!~,·.-,1 tn th~ "'" al-.,-,rie:in~I tribe 1n:1d~r ~uh-~ertinn ffi\ ·".
11111ue.,i by the C.overi,or or M~dhya Pra~e8h Urtder sub, Para11;raph (1) of Paragrph /; of
the Forth 1eheriule to lhe Con~titution of India, published in the Madhva PtadQh Rai-
patra (Asadharan), dated the 7th June, 1984, pages 1621-22.
11IB MADIIYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
(6-e) If the Bhumiswami for any reason whatsoever fails or is unable to
take possession of the land of which the right of possC'ssion stands
cause the pos:;cssion of land to be taken and cause the land to be
managed on bel1a1f of the Bhumis,,an:i subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed till such tim·c as the original Hhumi-
swami enters upon his land :
Provided that if any resistance is offered in re.5toring
CQllector shall use or cause to be used such force as may be necessary.
[(6-ee) The agricultural land tl'an.sferrccl b~ the .llhumiswami other than
a Hhumi,wami belonging to an aboriginal tr-ibc declared under sub-
section (6) to a person not belonging to an abor·iginal tribe shall not
be diverted for any other purpose before the expiry of period of ten
years from the date of transfer;]1
( 6-f) The provi ~ions of sub-sec ti on ( 6-a} 10 [ ( 6-ee) J II sha II Ii ave effcc t,
anything to tl1e (,Ontrary contained in this Code
or any other la\',· for the time being in force.]
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (l) or in any
i:lther law for the time being in force-
[(a) where the area of laud con.:priscd in a hoJding or if there
be more than one holding the aggregate area of all holdings
of a Bhumiswami is in excess of five acres of irrigated or
ten anc.s of unirrigated land, then only· su much area of
land in his holding or holding~ shall he liable to altar.h
menl or sa1e in execution of any decree or order as is in
ex<:ess of five acres of irrigated or ten acres of unirrigated
(b) no Jand comprised in a holding of a Bhurnis,-vami helon-
ging to a tribe which has been dcchLred to be an aboriginal·
tribe under sub-sec1ion {6) shall he liable tn he at1ached
or sold in excecution of ii.1~y decree or order;
(c) no receiver sh .. Il be appointed to manage the land of a
Rhumiswami under section 51 of the Code of Civil Proce-
dure, 1908 (V of 1908) nor sh all any such land vesl in
the c:011rt or anv receiver under the Provinci;.J Insolvency
Ac I. 1920 (V of· l 920), contrary to tht: provisions of da1.1se
Provided that nothing- in this sub-section shall apply where ,t charge has
been cre:ttl':d on the Jand by 1'. mortagage.
[(7-a) Xotwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (I), no Bhumi-
S\\ami specified in section 33 of the Madhya Pradesh Bhoodan Yagna
Adhiniyam, 19fi8 (No. 28 of 19G8) shall have the right to transfer
any in_tr.rest in hi~ land spcrifi,:d in the ~aid section without the per-
mission of the :Madhya Pradesh Bhoodan ".r:'agna Hoard.]'
[(7-b) Notwithstanding anything con1;1.ined in sub-section (1), a peron
who holds land from the State Government or whom right to
occupy land is granted by the State Go,,~rnmcnt or the Col1ector
as a Government lessee an<l who· subsequentl-); become~ B1'umisw~.mi
I. Ins., in its appli;a~i';'n I? Schd1!l"d Areas, by Government of ~fadhya PrndMh, Rc;enue
Departments lS ot,f,cat1on F. No. 37-4-VII-N-II-84, datecl the 4th June, 19B4, inued by
the Governor of ?>,1 arl~va !'radesh under sub-paragraph (I) of Par~er;,ph ', of tile Fifth
s~heduk to trw C"'.0Ml1t11t1on
published in the ~Jadhya Prad<"~h Rajpatr.-
dated the 7th June, 1984, pal'\'e;i 1621.22.
Subs. by M. P. Act 37 of 1973, S.2.
♦. Ins. by M. P. Act 15 of 1975, S .4.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENPE (ODE, 1959
of such land, shall not transfer such Ja11d without the perD?ission of
a Revenue Officer, not below the rank of a Collector, given
reasons to be recorded in writiHg.] 1
Nothing in this section shall prevent a Bhumiswami ~rom transferring
any right in his land to sec1m~ payment of, or shall ;iJTcct tl!e right of~e State
Government to sell such right for the recovery of, ;in advance made to him un~cr
theLand Improvem(~nt Loans Act, 1883 (XIX of 1883) or the Agricultunsts
Loam Act, IBM (XI: of 1884).
~othing in this section shall prevent Bhnmiswami from. transferr in
am right in his land to s<-cnre payment of an advance made to hun by a Co-
op~at:vc Society or shall affect the right of any such society to sell such right
fo1 the recovery of such advance.
{(9-a) !\othing in this section shall r-rewnt allhmr'.iq.1.Jrni ,d10 is n dis-
placed person from trn1ift"rr'r,f> 8r.~· 1ii:il.1 in hs Jar,d to ~ccurc pay-
ment of ,111 adv,nce rnadf: to him by the Dan<la.karanya Developmt:"nt
Authority or shall affer.t the right of that Audioricy to ~ell such right
the recovery of such advanre.
Explanation.- Ir, this rnb-~ecticn "di~r!::r((~ renrrc'' rrr?r,,., a person
displaced from tile territories now ccrrpriietl in Fm·! Pcki,1,n \\:ho is resettled
in Madhya Pradesh on or after the
l st dav of Arri! 1S57. 1 ndcr ruw scl,c.rue of
resettlement of displaced persons s<'-nctioncd by the Central Goyern~ent or the
f{9-b') !\othing iJ1 this ~ect101, skdl prcyent a Ehumisv.imi fron1 trans-
ferring an·) right in hi~ land to secure payment o1 <'.Il ad,anre made
to him by a Commercial Bank for purpo~e ofag-riculture or improvement
of holding or sl1all affect the right of any such Rank to sell rnch right
for the recovery of such advance,] 8
NotwitLstr,nrliHg irnything ccr,1L:ud in th:: Jr.din
ALI, 1908 (XVl of 1908), no <:fliccr l·mpo"-crc-d to regi~ter dc1.1 n ent~ there-
und<'r ~hdl ulmit to rcgisteration any document which purport~ to contraHne
the pro\·i1ion~ of tl,is ~ection.
N'othing in tl,is section shall-
(a) invalidate any transfrr wl-,idt "·as validly :rrzde: or
(b) validate anv transfer which was invalidlv made:
before the (,oming into force of this 'code. ·
Explanatien.- For purposes of this ~ecticn
or.e r.cre cf in·ig-atcd land
be deemed to be equal to tv.o acres of 1mirriga10J land and vire-vena.
(I) Jfa transfer of land is made in contravention of the provisiom
of dame (a) of i.ub-section (4 ·, of section 165 ~·o much of the land as is in excess
of the prc~cribcd ceiling limit wit!, the tran,feree sl>all, after its ~election by the
transfrrec within the pre~cribcd period and demarcation by a Sub-Divisional
Officer in accordance \1·itl. such rules ,15 may be made in that behalf, stand
f01feitcd to the State Government ;
Provided that if the transferee fails to make the sdection witliin the
pr~scribed period such selection shall be made by the sub-Divisional Officer.·
In,. by M. P. Act 15 of 1980, S 8.
Ins. by M. P. Act 38 of 196!, S.3(ii).
Jru. by M. P. Act 9 of 1970, S.3.
Omitte d by M. P. Act 25 of 1964, S. 16.
For feitur<:: in C3llCll of certain
'I1IB MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
The Sub-Divi~ior,al Officer shall in the cases referred to in sub-section
( l) and (2) fix the land rcvt:nue in the prescribed manner in respect of the land
Subject to the provisions of section 165 Bhurniswami~ may exchange
. tua1 agreement the whole or any part of their holdings for purposes of
n of holdings or securing greater convenience in cultivation.
168. [(I) Except in cases provided for in sub-sectiCJ1 (2), no Bhurnisv.·an;
shall lease any land comprised in his holding for more than one year during any
consecutive period of the three years :]1
[Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to the lease of any
(:') made by Bhum.iswami who is
a member of a registered
Co-operntive Farming Society to such Society;
(ii) held by a Bhumiswami for non-agricultural purposes.JI
E:itplanation,-For the purposes of this se-..ction--
"lease" means a transfer ofa right to enjoy any land, made
for a certain time, expressed or implied in consideration of
a price paid or promised or of money or any other thing of
value to be given periodically to the transferer by the
transferee who accepts the trans.fer on such terms,
(b) any arrartgt>ment whereby a person cultivates any land
of a Bhumiswami with bullock~ belonging to or procured
by such person (lessee) and on condition of his givin&
~1. specified-share of the produce of the land to the Bhumi
swami shall be deemed to be a lease,
the grant of a right merely to cut grass or to graze cattle or
to grow 'Singhara' or to propagate or collect lac, pluck or
CCl!l~ct tf"ndu leaves shall not be deemed to be a lease of the
A Bhumiswami who is~
(iJ a widow; or
(ii) an unmarried woman; or
(iiz7 a married woman who ha3 been deserted by her husband; or
(iv) a minor; or
(v) a person subject to physical or mental disability due to oJd
,1ge or otherwise; or
(vi) a person detained or imprisoned under any proces~ oflaw; or
(uii) a person in the sennc<,: of Armed Forces of the Union; or
( ;,iii) a public, charitable or religions institution; or
{i.i,) a local authority or a Co-operative Society;
-may lea~ the whole or any part of his holding :
Provided t11at where a holding is held iointly by mo~ than one person tbe
provisions of this sub-section shall not be applicable unleSG all such pel'llOna be
Jong to any ont" or more of tr_e classes aforesaid :
1. Subs.!!. P. a.,ct 25 ofl9&t-
by S. 17 (a.).
2. Suba. by :M. P. Act 2+ of 1961, S.11.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODF, llJ:,J
Provided further that any lease m'.lrle in. p·ursuancc of this sub-section shall
cease to be in force after Olle year of the dt:tennination of the disability by death
'\.'here a lease is granted in pnrsuanc:c of [Sub-section (2)] t the
lessee shall holu the land on such terms and condilions as may be agreed upon
between him and the Bhumiswami and may be eJected by an order of a Sub-
Divisional Officer on the application of the Bhumiswami cin the ground of
con traven ti on of any ma tcrial tl~rm or condition of the lease or 011 the lease
cea~ing to be in force.
Where on the coming into force of this Code am· htd i~ held on
lease from a Bhumiswami who belongs to any one or mo;e o!' the classes.
mentioned in sub-section (2), such lMse shall, on the comi."1! mto
this Code, he deemed to he a lease granted in pursuance of sub-section (2).
[ 169. If a Bhumiswami-
leases out for any ;ieri od any lanrl com prised in
in contravention of section ·158; or
by an arrangement which is not a lease under sub-section
(!) of section 168 allows any person to cultivate any
land comprised in his holding otherv1ise than as his hired
labour and under that arrangement such person is
allowed to be in posses~ion of such land for a period
exceeding two years without being evicted in accordance
the rights of an occupancy tenant ~hall,-
in the case of (i) above,
thereupon accrue to the
in such land; and
in the case of (ii) above, on the expiration of a period
of two years from the
date of possession, accrtle to
such person in that land :
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply ~o a land comprised in
the holding of a Bhumiswami belonging to a tribe which has heen
declared to be an aboriginal tribe under sub-section (6) of section
165 and which is leased out by him or in respect of
has made an arrangement as aforesaid,as the case may be.Js
(1) Where possession is transferred by a Bhumiswami in
suance of a transfer which is in contravention of sub-section (6) of
165 any person who, if he surVivcd the Bhumiswami without nearer heirs
would inherit the holding, may,-
till the 31st December 1978, in . the case of transfer of
possce,sion prior to the I st July 19 76; and
apply to the Sub-Divisional Officer to he placed in possession
as the Sub-Divisional Officer may, in accordance with the rules made i11
behalf, determine to his acceptance of the Jiahilitics for arrears of land revenue
or any other dues which form a charge on the holding, and the
nal Officer shall dispo~e of such application in accordance with the
dure as may be prescribed.]4
I. Omitted by M. P. Act 25 of 1964, S.17(b).
Subs. by S. 17(c), for "sub-section (2) or (3) ".
Subs. by M. P. Act 15 of 1980. S. 9.
Subs. by :\L P. Act 61 of 197G, S ,4
U nau thoriacrl lease etc.
Avotdantt of transfer in con-
tn..-ention (If tecti.on IM.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 19i9
Certain transfers t.o be ;et
: \ ·, ..
Reversion of land o.i mNtther~
of aboriginal tribe whk:1 wa~
_ . _ (2)
When: ,my land of a Bhmniswami fa sold in contrav<"Jltion 01
:;ubser.:tlo~i (~) of sectiun 16.:i, th,! cCLu·t hy whic:h ~udi rnlc is ordered 5ha.U, on
the arphca:1on: of the Bhumiswami or any person who, if he survived
Hhmmsw..im1 without nearc.· heirs would inherit the holding rnade within two
years r,f such sale, set aside the sale and place tlie applicant in possession of
the lantl subject to his arrcpting the liability for al'rean. of and revenue or
any othci- due:s which form a charge on the land.
J[ 170.A. (I) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation
~' 1, 1963 (No. 36 of 1963), the SuL-Dh-isional (.)fficer may: on his own mo--
uo11 or on an application ·rnade by a tra.nsferer of agricultural land
t~ a tribe which has beci·.
declared to be an aboriginal tribe 11nder sub-sec-
uun (6,) of section 165 on or before the 31st December 19781
transfer effected L)'· way of sale, 01· in pursuance of a decree of a court of such
land to a person not belonging to such tribe or transfer effected by
accn1a~ of right of occupancy tenant under section 169 or of Bhumiswami
under suh-section (2-A) "f section 190 at any time during the period commen-
cing on the 2nd October1 1959 and ending on the date of con:menccment . of
the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Third Amcndemnt) Act, 1976 to
$atisfy himself as to thr. bonafide natur~ of such transfer.
(2) If the Sub-Divisional Officer on an enquiry and after giving
:. reasonable opportunity to the persons owning any interest . in such_ land, is
satisfied that such transfer was not bona fide, he may notw1thstandmg anr
thing contained in this Code or any other enactment· for the time being in
subject to the provisions of clause (b), set aside _such transfer
if made by a holder belonging to a tribe which. has been
declared to be an aboriginal tribe under sub-section (6) of
section l 65 and resto1·e the land to the transfer er; or
subject to the provisions ofdause (b), set aside sudi transfer
if made by a holder belonging to a trib~ which has been
declared to be ai1 aborigional tribe under sub-section (6) of
section 165 and [restore the land to the transferer by putting
him in possession of the land forthwith,]'
where such land has been divt:rted for non~agricultural
purposes, he shall fix the price of such land which it would
have fetched at the time of transfer and order the transferee
to pay the difi'eren~e, if anv, between the price so fixed and
the price actually paid to rh'e
transferer within a period of
Ever,· person who on t11e date of commencement of
th~ Madhy,1 Prn.desh Land 'Revenue Code (Amendment) Act; 1980 '(herein~ ·
after referred to as the Amendment Act of 1980) is in possession of agrkul~
tural Iand which helongecl to a member of a tribe which hn~ been declared
to he an aborigin:il tribe under sub-section (6) of secti(")n 165 between the
re?"Tt)ft · commencing on the 2nd October, 1959 and ending on the
thf" (ornmencement of Amenclmc-nt Act of 1980 shnll, within [two years]4
stt(,h commencement, notifv to the Sub-Divisional Officer in such form and in
!'Inch mr-i.nner ;1s mav he pr~scrihed, ~11 th~ infortnation a~ to h;,w he has cnme
~r. """~~~~sin.,. nf .::nch b.nr!.
TM. by ~f. P. Act.61 of 1976, S. '.:1,
it, appl!cation to Scheduled Area,
by Government of Madhya
P-evenu(, Department's Notification F.No.l-70-7-N-2-83, dated the 5th.January, 1984, issued
~y the ( ;,wernor ul :tl._fad~ya Prad,:sh under sub:pim,graph ( l) or paragrn~h :; of the Fifth
S<1hed1.1k to the Const1tut1on of India, published tn the ~Iadhya Pradesh RaJpatra (Asa,\ha
ran), dakd the Gth .J :i.,111'1.r\' 1984, pages '.?3-29. fnr "restore th~ land to the traniforcr"
Im. bv !\I. P. \,-t I~ nf l'.l1J<), S.10.
S<1b,;, by ~{. P. Act l9 uf J 982, S, '.!. fo,· ",:,n~ yea,·".
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 195Y
If any person fails to notify the information as required by sub-
_.._ section {l) within the periotl specifit:d thcn:in i ! sltdl be prcrnmc<l th«t such
person has been in possession of the agr:cidtnral krd withna ;.:1,y
authority and the agriculturd k.nd shall, on tl-.e e.xpir8-tio11 of the period afort:-
said revert to the person to whom 1t origi;rnlly belonged and if that person be
dead, to his legal heirs.
On receipt of the information under sub-se,ction (I), the Sub-Divi-
sional Officer shall made such e,,quiry as may be deemed necessary about all
such transations of transfer and if he finds that the member of aboriginal tribe
has been defrauded of his legitimate right he shall declare: the transaction null
and void and pass an order revesting the agricultural land in the trar:sferer
and, jfhr.- te dead, in his legal heirs,]
On receipt of the information under sub-~ection (1) the Sub-
Divisional Officer shall make !-uch enquiry as may be necessary a bout aU such
trar.sactions <:>f transfer and if he finds that the member of aboriginal tribe hrui
been defrauded of hls legitimate right he sJ-,aU declare the tramation null and
Whert no building or
.,-tructure has been erected on
the agricultural la7l-d prior to such finding pas.'! an order
revestin~ the agricuhural land in the transferer and if
he be dead, in his legal heirs,
Where any building or structure has been erected on the
agricultural land prior to such finding, he shall fix the
price of such land in accordance with the principles laid
down for fixation of price of land in the Land Acquisition
Act,· 1894 (No. l of 1894) and order the person referred
sub-section (I) to pay to the transferer the
difference, if any, between the price so fixed and the
price actnalJy paid to the transfcrer :
Provided that where the building or structure has been erected after the
,;:· 1st day of January, 1984· the provisions of clause (h) above shall not apply :
Provided further that Gxation of price under clause (b) shall be with
reforenee to the price on the date of registration of the case hr.fore
the Sub-Divisional Officer.] I
[ 170-C. ~otwithstanding anything contained irl
1961 (No. 25 of 1961) no Advocate shall appe.-r before a Revenue Officer
under any _proceeding uuder section .] 70-A or 170-B wi thn.ut the pcrmillsiom
of such officer :
, Provided that· if permission ·:1~
granted to one party not belonging to a
tribe which· has · been declared
to he an aboriginal
tribe under sub-section (6)
of section 165, sfrnila1; assistance shall
always be provided tu -the-
to melt tribe at
·the cost o,f11ncl through lega I a.id agency.
170-D . Notw,hh:!1tandin;2; ·any~hing. containt;11 in this Cc1c]c, no s~cond
appeal shall he against the orders passed on or· after th c 24th Oc tobPr 1983 ·
under :iiection 170-A and section 170-B.]"
l 71.. A Bhumiswami of land held for the purpose of agrict 1lture is enti-
tled __ to make _any i?J,provement thereon for the better cultivation of the land_
or lt!I more convenient_ uoie for the purp~e aforesaid.
l. ~ub.~., in it, application to ·scheduled Art'a.,, by Government· of ?-.Iadhya l'rad~gh. RcviP.nur.
Department's Notification F. No. l-70-VII-N-2-83, datf"d t.he :>th January, 198-1-, issum by
the Governor of Madhya Pradesh under sub-par~gmph (1) of parawaph 5 of the Fifth
Schedule to th: Constitution oflndia, publishea jn the Madhva Pri,,k~h Raipntra (.\~aoh;,-
ran), elated tht, 6th January, l!}!l-1, pag"' 23-29.
Advocate not 1D appear .in
170-A or I 7().B
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
(I) [If a Bhumi½wiuni of land held for any purpose in~
urban area or within a radius of five milt's from tli e outer
limits of such area;
a village with a populati011 of two thou~and or above
according to last census;
in snch other ,treas as the State Govemmcn t may,
wishes ru divert his holding or any parr thereof to any other purpose except
agriculture,J 1 he shall apply for permission
IO the Sub-Divisional Officer
who may, subject to tJ-1e provisions of this section and to rules mad~ under
this Code, refuse permission or grant ; t on such conditions as he may think
Provided that should the Sub-Divisional Officer neglect or cmiit for three
months after the receipt of an application under sub-section (iJ to make and
deliver to the applicant an order of permission Ot refusal in respect thereof, and
applicant 1-ias bv written communica. lion called the attention of th<' Sub-
Divisional Officer to ,the omission or neglect, ;:ind
,uch omi,· ion or
continues for a further period of six mo;~ths, the Sub-Divisio;1al Officer
be decined to have granted the pcrmissio.!1 witho1,t any cortdition.
Permission to diverl mav be refused bv the Sub-Divisional Officr
only 0:1 the ground that the diversfon is Iih+v to cause a public rmi.,ance. or
the Bhnmis\vami is u:1ab]e
or urnvilling to comply with the conditions that
Conditions may he imposed on diversion for thf' following nbjec!5
and no others, namely, in order to secure the public 1waldi, safctv and convenl-
cnce, and in the case of land which is to be used as building sites. in
in additio:1 that the dimensions, arrangement and accessibility of tlie
sites arc adequate fir the health and convenience of occupiers or are sHitable
(4) If any land has b!".en diverted without permission hy the Dhmnis,vami
or by any other person with or without the consent of the Bhumjrn,ami the
Sub-Divisional Officer on receiving
inforrmltion thereof, may impose on the
person responsible for the diversion a penalty not exceeding two hundred rupee~,
and may proceed in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (l) as if
an application for permission to divert Irnd been made.
(5) If any land has been diverted in contravention of an order passed
or of. a condition imposed under any of the fore going sub-sections, the Sub-
Divisional Officer may serve a notice on the person responsible for such con-
travention, directing him, within a reasonable period to be stated in the notice,
to use the land for its original purpose or to observe the condition; and such
notice may require such person to remove any structure, to fill up aJl}' excavatic>n,
or to take such other steps as may be required in order that the land may be
used for its original purpase, or that the condition may be satisfied.
Divisional OffiCl".r may also impose on such person a penalty not
two hundred ruoec~ for such contravention, and a further penalty not exceeding
twenty rupees for each day during which such contravention is persisted in.
If any person served with the notice under sub-~ection (5) {ails within
the period stated in the uotice to take the steps ordered by the Sub-Divisional
Officer under that sul:Hection,
the Sub-Divisional Officer may himself take
!\uch steps or ea11~ them to be taken; and any cost incurred in so doing shall
be recoverable from such pcrso.n as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
Explaa.ation,~Diversion in this ~ection means using land assessed to one
purpose undm- section 5Q to any other purpose mentioned therein but using land
for the purnose of agric1.1lture where it is asse!!5ed with reference to any other
purpose shall not be rlccmed to be diversfon.
I. Subs. by M, P. Act 25 of 1964, S, J9(i).
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
[(6-a) If any land has been diverted in contravention of sub-section
~ (6-ee) of section 165, the Sub-Divisional Officer in addition to taking action laid
down in sub-sections (5} and (6), shall also impose a penalty not exceeding five
thousand rupees for such contravention and a further penalty not exceeding one
hunired rupee1 for ea.ch day during which such contravention is persisted in.]1
'\-\7here after having been assessed for agricu 1 ture, any land situated
in urban area is kept follow for a continuous period of two years, it shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, be deemed to have
diverted to a non-agricultural purpose and shall be reassessed accordingly :
Provided that no action shaU be taken under this sub-section unless the
person affected thereby is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard].
Subject to rules made under this Code,
relinquish his rights, that is, resign them in favom of the State Government.
but subject to any rights, tenures, encumbrances or eq'uities lawfully subsisting
in favour of any person, other than the State Government or the Bhumiswami,
by giving notice in writing to the Tahsilda,- not less than thirty days before the
date of commencement of the agricultural year and thereupon he shaU cease
to be a Bhumiswami from the agricultural year next following such date of such
order. In case of the reJinquishment of only a part of the holding the Tahsildar
1hall apoortion the asSc:ssment of the holding in accordanr.e with the rules made
under this Code :
Provided that the relinquishment of a holding or any part of a holding,
which is subject to an encumbrance or a charge, shall not be valid.
174. If any sub-division ofa survey nwnber or plot number is relinquished
under section 173, the Tahsildar shall offer the rights to occupy such sub-division
at such premium as he thinks fit to the Bhumiswami of the other sub-sdivisions
of the same survey number or plot Bumber and if there be competition among
1uch Bhumiswamis he shall sell such right to the highest bidder amongst them.
175. If any person relinquishes his rights to land, the ·way to which lies
through other land retained by him any, future ho[d¢r of the land relinquished
1hall be entitled to a right of way through the land retained.
Right of way to rdinq11idied
(I) If a Bhumiswami ceases to cultiv;ite his holding for two years
either by himself or by some other person, does not pay land revenue and has
left the village in which he usually resides, the [Tahsilder]1 may, after such
enquiry as he may deem necessary, take possession of the land comprising the
holding and arrange for its cultivatfon by letting it out on behalf of the Bhumi-
twami for a period of one agricultural year at a time.
Where the Bhumiswami or any other person lawfully entitled to tho
}and claims it within a pcrjod of three years fr0m the comrnenc~ent of the
agricultural year next following the date on which the ITahsildar]1 took po~ssion
of the l,n ·l, ;t 3hall h~ r~'!torerl to him 0:1. paymP.Ylt of the rlues, if any, and on
such term, a:1.d conditions a!! the [Tahsildar ]1 may think fit.
'Where no claim i1 preferred under sub-section (2) or if a claim is
th.e fTah~ildar] l shall make an order dedaring the
holdin!'.{ aba:rido:i.ed a:"ld the holdin!'.{ shall vest ab,;olutely in the State GoveTnment,
from such date a!! may be !lpecified in that behalf in the orde!-.
(4) Where a holding i5 declared abandon~d undt:r sttb-,it:ction C~). the
liabilitv of the Bhumiswami for the an-cats of revenue due from him in respect
thereof sha11 stand discharged.
1. Ins., in it, application to Schcdu1cd Areas, hy Government or Madhya Pradesh, Reveov.e
Department's Notification F. No. 37-4-VU-N-TI-84, da~d the 4th June, 1984 issued by the
Governor or Maahv" Pra,leh under sub-pa.ra~raph {I) of Para~raph 5 of ,1,e Fifd1
s~hed11le to the Constitutioo of India, published in the Madhya PJack.h Rajpalra
(Asadharan) dated the- 7th June, 1984-, pap 162l-'.i2.
3. Sub.by M. P. Act 24 of 1001, S.6 for "Collector".
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVFNUE CODE. 1959
177  . (l) If a Bhumiswami whose land has been assessed for the pur-
p~ o~ agriculture uri~er scctioii 59, er wlio hclds land for dwernng purpo!;es,
dies, w1tho1:1t known h~1rs, the [T;,.hsikk:rjl shal.l rnke possession 01' his lancl and
may lease 1t for a period of or.1e yc~r at a time,
If w1 di.in three years of the <late on which the [Tahsildar ]1 take&
possess_10;~ of the land any chimant applies for the holding being rc~tored to l-!im,
~he _(1 ah1~Jcla1·]1 may, after such. enr1,uiry as he thinks fit, place such claimant
m possesslOn of the land or rcJect his claim .
The order of the [Tah:.ildar]1 passed undet sub-section (2) shalll
not be subject to appeal or revi:tion but any person whose claim is rtjectctl under
sub-section (2) may, withi!.l one year from the date of the communicatton of the
ordt:r of the [Tahsildar]1 file a civil suit to establish his title, and if such suit is
filed1 the frahsildar}1 shall continue to lease out the land as provided in sub-
section {l) till the decision of the suit.
If no claimailt appears within th1ee years from. the date on
which the [Tahsildar]1 took possession of the land or jf a claimant whose· claim
has been rejl"cted under sub-section (2) does not file a suit within one yeri.r as
provided in sub-section (3), the [Tahsildar]1 may sell the deceased Bhumiswami's
right in the holding by auction.
l\.i"otwithstanding anything contained in any lawf or the time
being in force a claimant who establishes his title i!l fa.nd which has heen d,~alt
with in accordance w.ith the provisions of this section, shall be entitled only to the:
rents payable under sub-section (I) and the sale proceeds realized under sub-
section (4) less all sums due on the holding 0;1 account of land reve::iue and the
expem.ses of ma:iagemen t and sale.
If in· :'\ny holding, which has been asse~sed for puipose of
agriculture· under sectio11 59, there are more than one- Bhu.miswami any ~u.ch
Bhmniswami may apply to a Tahs.=Id~r for a purtition of his share in tht' holding:
[Providl~d that if any question of title is ra.ised the "iahsildar sh~ll s_ta}.-
the proceeding before him for a period of three months to facilitate the mstitu-_
rion of a civil suit for determination of the quc~tion of title.]2
f(l-A) If a civ.il suit is filed within 1he period specified in tle proviso to
a..".1d stay OHier is
tlv; civil ~o.m-t, the
Tah~ildar sh;:ill stay his proceedings per.ding the di-ris.ion of the r:1v1l court.
ff rm civil suit is fifed w.ithin the said period, 1le shaU vacate the stay order
and proceed to partition the holding in accordance with the entries in the
(2) The Tahsildar mav after headnrr the co-trnure holden", divide
the holding and apportion the assessment of the Jrnlding in accordance wit t e
rule~ made nnder this Code.
Lplanation J.----For purposes of·thit section any co-sharer of the hold-
ing of a Bhumiswami who has obtained a declaration of his title in such holding
from a competent Civil Court shall he deemed to· be a co-tenure holder of such
I. Subs. by M. P. Act 24 of 1961, 5. 12,for .. Sub-DivisioDal Officcrn,
!-, !llub. by M. P. Act 18 of t97B., S.%(i).
i. Int. by S.2(ii), ibid.
4. Omitted by M. P. Act 25 of 1961, S. 20.
THL lvl.ADHY A PRADESH LAND RE\iENl.JE CODE, 1959
Sulijrct to the prov1s1om of sections 240 and 241 all trees
Rights to trm is holding.
standing iu the holding of ~ El1 umicw;:ir;1 i sbdl bdong to him.
Xothing 111 rnb-,ection (l) skll ;:::tlf'ct airy right in trees in the
holcb,!2; of °' Dhumisw.::.rni in favour of any pcr:c:on exi~ting on the dae of t];e
comi21i i,1to force ol ,his Code, but t;w Bl11mii,,:;v0mi may ::pp)y ro the Tahsildar
tr !i's: tht'. v;:i.h;c of sue!, ri,:rh t ;:i: !C purcl1 ase tb': right throug1 ·. I hf'. T,±~;JJ;,,r in
guch 111;,aner ~1s n:c:Iy he p~·e,,,:,,ibed.
The transfer by a Blrnrni;wami of a,ry trees standing in any
lancl com,,ri~ed i,1 hir holding ,;;icei t the produce of such tiees shall be 'roid
u~1ns t1w land itseu· io ,.-'ir ,foned.
Restriction 01< u-an~fer of tr~.
1ree3 :;randing in c1ny 1:,nd ccn,pri,:ecl in the holding of 2. Ehn·
n,iswanu shall not be attached or sold i :, rxec u Li cin of a decree or nnfr-r of ,".
Civil Court or under ,u ord~r of a. RcveEcc Offic<'T or l,nder an order mad.:
unle,.~ the in pursua1"C'; of any provisio11s of any law for the time being 111 force
lar,d. i t,elf i, ;, tnche,l or sold.
Government Lessees and Service Land
1: very per:::on who h r,lrl~ I ar.d from tL e State Governmel1 t
or tu whom a ,,igh1 tr occupy bnd is gran1ed by the State GO\'enm0 ent c,r to
Co:1ector ;md who is nc,t entitled tc, hold bnd 2s a IIbmJ(swami ~hall be called
a Gc·.,.·rnme11t l"ssec i'1 re,pect of ,:uch land.
Every pa~on ,vho at the coming into force of this Code-
(a) holds any land in the lvfadhya Bharat region as an ordi-
nary ten:::nt as defined in the 1[adhy;i Bhar::it Land
R'-·ve,1ue and Tenancy Act, S:m1vat 2007 (66 of 1950); or
(b) hc,lcls :my land iTJ. the VindLyc1. Pradesh region as a special
1,:J1J.JJt as defim:cl in the Vinclhya Prade:,li L:u~d Re\'enue
and Tcnadcy Act, 19.",3 (III of l 955), or :is a g-air 11 aqdar
tenant any grnve or tank or lznd 'which h«s been acquired
or which is required for Government or pub lie uurposes; or
(c) holds iLv bnd from the State Government in the Sironj
a gair kh" tedar tenar, t "s defined in the
R~{jastlrnn Ten~ncy Act, 1955 (3 of 1955);
\ \;:Ji be: deemed t(l be a Government le,~ee m respect of
A Government lessee shall,
~ubjed to w:y exp1ess provisions
in thi, C:ode, holcl hi~ land in accordanc'-' ,vith the lerms and conditions of the
g,·~mt, which shall be deenwd to be a grant within the meaning of the Govern
me·'.t Gr::rnts Act, 189:, (XV of lc,9~)).
A Government lesse-e may be ejN:ted from his land by order ofa
Reve-nue Officer on one or more of the fo]k,,v ing grounds, n,ime ly :~
(i) that he h;,,s foiled to nay the rent for a period of three months
from the date on v,·hich it became due; or
( ii) tha.t he has used such land for purposes other than for
which it wa:, granted;_ or
(iii) that the term of hj!I lease has expired; or
(iv) that he has contravened any of the terma and conditions
of the grant :
J. Chniteed by M. P. 25 of 1964, S.2L
of a. Government lo8tt:.
TIIE MAJ!)HYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Di!J>OSal of ~ervice land in Siron j
Region when service. no loDgCr
Provided that no order for ejectment of a Government lessee under this
sub-se_ction shall be passed witliout giving him an opportunity of being heard
Any person holding land on the condition ofrendering service
as village servant shall cec>se to be entitled to such land if he diverts such land
A transaclion by which~ village servant attempts to transfer his
interest in his service land by sale, gift, mortgage, sub-lease or otherwise except
by a sub-lease for a period not exceeding one year, shall be void.
If the hoider 0f 5Uch land dies, resigns or is lawfully dismissed,
shall pass to his successor in office.
The right of the holder in such land shall not be attached or
sold in execution of a decree nor shall a receiver be appointed to manage
such land under section 51 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908).
l84  If the Collector declares that the services rendered by a village
servant in any village in the Sironj region are no longer required, such village
servant shall become a Bhumiswami in respect of his service land and be liable
to pay land rt"Venue accordingly.
185. (I) Every perso:i who at the coming into force of this Code holds--
in the Mahakoshal region-
(a) any land, which before tl-t" coming into force of the
Madhya Pradesh Land·Revenuc Code, 1954 (II of 1955),
was malik-makbuza and of which such person had been
recorded as an absolute occupancy tenant; or
land as an occupancy tenant as defined in the
).fadhya Prade~h Land Revenue Corle, 1954 {II of 1955); or
any land as an ordinary tenant as defined in the Madhya
Pradesh Land Revenue Cod<', 1954 (II of 1955); or
in the Madhya Bharat 1egion-
(a) any Inam land as a tenant, or as a rub-tenant or as &n
Explanalion~ The expression 'Inam land' shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it in the Madhya Bharat Muafi and Inam Tenant.1 a.nd
Sub-Tenantl Protection Act, 1954 (32 of 1954).
any land <ts ryotwari sub-lesscee as defined in the Madhya
Bharat Ryotwari Sub-Lessees Protection Act, 1955 (29 of
any Jagir land as defined in the Madhya Bharat Abolition
of Jag:)rs Act, 1951 (28 of 1951), as a subtcnant or 3.$
a tenant of a sub-tenant; or
{J) any land or a proprietor as defined in the Madhya Bharat
Zamindari Abolition Act, 1951 (13 of 1951), as a sub-
a tenant of. a rub-tenant:
in the Vindhya )?radesb Region any land as a sub-tenant of a
pachpan paintalU tenant, pattedar tenant, grove holder or
holder of a tank ~ defined in the Vindhya Prade.h Land
Revenue and Tenancy A('t, 1953 (III of 1955) ; or
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
(iv) m the Bhopal region-
(a) any land as a sub-tenant as defined in the Bhopal State Sub-
tenar,ts Protection Act, 1952 (VII of 1953) ; or
(b) any land as a ~hikmi frcm an occupnnt as defined in the Bhopal
State Land Rewnue Act, 1932 (JV of 1932); or
in the Sironj region-
(a) any ]l'lnd as a sub-tenant of a khated&r tenant or grove holder
as defined in the Rajastlian Tenancy Act, 1935 (3 of 1955); or
(h) anv land as a sub-tenant er tenant of K!mdk:1sh1 .i., defined in
th~ RrJasthan Tenni1cy Act, l 9.'"J5 {3 of l 955);
shnll be called an occupancy tenant and ~hall have all the rights and be sllh
ject to all the liahilities conferred or impo~ctl upon an occupancy tenant Ly or
'\.\"hc1e any bnd referred to in iten,s (c) or (d) of clause (ii) of~ub~
section (ll is at the time of ccrr:ing into force of this Code, ln actual
ssion of a toiant of a
sub·ter,ant, then such ter,rnt and Pot tll(,
shall be deemed to be the oceup,incy tenant <A sud1 land.
Notfong io sub-section (I) shall apply to a penon who at the
coming into force of this Code, hold~ tl1e land from a Bhumiswilrrii who be-
Ion gs to any one or more of the classes mentioned in sub-section (2) of section
Nothing in tllis section shall affect the rights of a sub-knant o[
tenant of a wb-tenant bdongi1Jg to any of the categories
(c) and (d) of clause (ii) of sub-~xtion (1) to acgpire t]1e
ten2.nt in accordance with tLc nrovi~icns of the ll!adl:va Bhcw,t
of Jagin Act, 1951 (28 of 1951),'or of the 'Madhya El.ara't Ze,mim1ari Aboli-
tion Act, 1:-151 (1'3 of 1951), as the cme may be.
agreerrent er mage er
order of a court or 2ny Jaw 10 the conirary, the maximum rent p:,y,,l.,'.c· liy r.n
occurancy tenant in respect of the land held by him shall not cxct>c<l. -
in the rnse of any rli.ss of irrig2tcd land~ four timeB
tl1c hmd revenue asses~ed on such land_:
in case of bimdh land in the Vindlva Pr;,dcsh
region- three Cmes the land revenue aVie,;:cd on wch
in any other case- two times tl-c land revenue assessed :
[ Provided (11,3,[ V>11erc n-di hn dis ex<rrpt frrrn p2yrrcnt of hmd reYenuc
under section 58-A; the rn8xi1n:m rent .'.lfcre'.a::cl ,hall Le rcdt,Ced bv ibc amow,t
of land revenue so exempted under the said ~ection, J2
E:lfpiana1ien.- Vl"hne Fny kud h,1s not leen B~fes~ed to J;,,nd n·vc11t1e,
the multiples aforernid shall bi/ calcnla tcd on the basis of the land revenue
. assessable on such land.]
. l 87 -
Wr.cre !ln occupi-.ncy tcn:m t p!!ys his rent in, k~d, .in, terms
of service, labour) crop share or a specified quantity of grain, he . rr.~y: apply
tlie Sub-Divi~ional Officer for ccrrmuting the s!lrne into cash.]3
Sub~. hy M. P. Act 20 of 1968, S. 3.
2. Subs. Ly M. P. Act 5 of l9G9, S. 3.
3. Subs. by M. P. Act 24 of 1961, S. 13.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVE1'1JE CODE, 1959
Rcumption b;· Bhumlswaroi in
_ .. (2J On receipt of an application under st,b-section (1), lhl: Sub-Divi- -,
sional Ofn~er shaU aftt>r.holding an enquiry commute hv an order in writing
sue~ rc'1t mto cash, which shall not exceed the max.imum rr::nt laid down in
(l) The rent payable by an occpancy tenant shall, as from the
~ommeuccment of the agricultural year next idlowing the date of the-
ll'to force of this Code, be the maximum rent laid dowH in section J86 or in
the rent agreed upon between d e tenant and his Bh umi swami is les.s th an the
maximum rent, then such agreed rent ;
[Provided that wtere the agreed rent is
payable in kind, the tenant
shall be liable to pay, until such rent is commuted into cash under section 187
the maximum rent laid down in section 186. ]1
{2) Every occupancy tenant shall pay the rrnt to his Bhumiswami
on or before such date as may be prescribed in that behalf.
(I) A Bhumiswami whose land is held by an ocurpancy tenant
[belonging to any of the categories specified in sub-section (I) of section 185;
except in items (a) and (h) of clause (i) thereof}il may, if the area of land
under his persor-ial cultivation is below twenty-five acres of unirrigate~ l~d,
within one year of the coming into force of this Code, make au. appbcat~on
to the Suh-Divisional Officer for resumption of land held by his occupancy
tenant for his personal cultivation.
{2'1 On r,~c~ipt of the application, the Sub-~ivi~ional Officer shall_
after hearing the parties and making rnch further enqmry as may he necessary
decide the application :
Provided that the ri,~ht of resmnption shall he limittd to the area whic~,
togtther with the area already under the pers_on:i-I cultivation of the Bhum1-
swami shall not exceed kwnty-five acres of umrngated land :
Provided forther that no resumption shall be allowed so as to reduce the
total a .-ea of land in possession of the- m·cupancy tenant bdow:
rwenty-fivc acres of cniuigated land if the occupancy tenant has
bct'l 1-:oiding such land fron1 a Bhumis,vami not belonging to
any of the classes men lloned in sub-sec ti on l 2) of sec ti on I 68,
for n1ore than five i'''·'"' prior to the coming into force of this
te1 acres ,n any other ca,;e.
(3) \'Vhcre under an order passed unde1· ~ub-~cctio11 12) the Bhumi
swami is allowed to resume a part of the land held by the occupancy tenant
from such Bh umiswami, the Sub-Di'/ isi on.al Officer sh a !I r,clec t and d,-rnarca te
the land allowed to be resumed in accordance with ~urh rules as may be made
behalf. The resumption ,hall b~ allowed only if the Bhumiswami
agrees to pay th~ occupancy tenant such compensation as the Sub-Divisional
Officer may, aftf'r hearing the parties, ~ix for thf' improvement effected by th_e
occupancy tenant for the land
allowed to be resumed by the Bhumiswami.
Thrl- Sub-Divisional Officer shall also in such a case fix the rent in the pre~
,cribed manner in rc~peet of the land left with the occup:my tenant.
(4) Every order allowing resumption shall take effect from t!-e agn-
cultutal year next following the date of the orck· an<l the tenaJJC:y of the occu-
pancy tenant in respect of the lan.d resumed ,hal1 ~t~nd terminated.
I. Added by M. P. Act 24 of 1961, S, 14. ibid,
Subs. by 8. IS, ibid for
"oth(',r th~ ri an occupanc )' tenant be!ongin~. to any of tl,e
categories spccifi ed in i tem.51 (a) au d (b) of clause ( i} of sub-sect ion I l) of  ~ction I 85" .
iIHE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
Explanation. .. For the purpose of d1i, ,ec1inn
the land undet th c pe rson..tl cul 1 ; \' ,1 1fon of : ,It Ii u 1i~wami ~ha 11
aHv h:itl lr.insferred by him b·,-
,;air; or otherwi~e on or
aft;r the lst January 1959; aud '
any land allowed by him to lie- follow.
Que "ere of irrigated Ja.nd shat! be lkcrned to be equal to
two ac-res of unirrigated land and vice versa.
[ (1) Where a Bhwniswami whose land is held by an occupancy
tenant belonging to any of the categories specified in sub-section (1) of ~ection
185 except in items {a) and (b) of clause (i) thereoffails to make an application
under s11b-section (l} of section 189 within the period laid down therein, the
rights of a Bhumiswami shall accrue to the occupancy tenant in respect of the
land held by him from such Bhumiswami with dfect from the commencement
of the agricultural year ne:itt following the expiry of the afor!"said p::riod. ]1
Where an application ;! made by a Bhumisw,imi in accordar,c:
with the provision of sub-section (1) of section 189, the rights of a Bhumiswam1
shall accrue to the occupancy tenant in respect of the land remaining with him
after res1unption if any allowed to the Bhumiswami with effect from the comme
ncement of the agricultural year next following the date on which th~ appli-
.:ation is fin'il.lly dispo.,ed of.
Where the land of a Bhumiswami is held by an occupancy
tenant othtr than an occupancy tenant referred to in sub-section (1), the rights
of a Bhumiswami shall accrue to the occupancy tenant in respect of such land-
in the c.tsc of occupancy tenants of the cat,.gmies specifkd
in items (a) and (b) of clause (i) of sub-section (l) of
section 185, with effect from the commem·ement of the
agricultural year neict following the commencement of
in any other case, with effect f1 om the ci,.1i1tnenccmc1, t
agricultural Y''.ar :-.ext foliowin'f the dfite on
which tl1f:" right~ of ar:i o~,cupancy
Where the rights of a Bhumiswami ,..,ccrue to an occupancy tenant
under sub-section (I), [sub-section (2) or sub-section (2-A) p such occupancy
tenant shall he liable to pay to his Bhumiswami compensation equal to fifteen
times the land revenue payable in re~pect of thr land in five equal annual
instalme:1.ts, each instalment being payable ori. the date on v,hich the rent pay
able u~der section 188 for the corresponding year falls due, and if default is
made m payment, it sh<11l be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue :
Provided that if from any cause the land revenue is suspended or remitted
m whole or in part in any area in any year, the annual instalment of compen
'!lation payable by an occupancy tenant holding land in such area in respect of
that year shaII be suspended and shall become payable one year after the
last of the remaining instalments.
Any occupancy ten11!lt may at his option pay the entire amount
of compensation in a lump sum, and where an or:cupancy tenant exerdse this
optio,, he shall be entitled to a rebate at the rate often per cent.
Subs. by M. P. Act 24 of !961, S. 16(i).
Add,.d, hv. S .16 (ii1 il,id.
3. Su.b! hy S, 16,:iii), ibid for ''or sub-,~ction {2)"',
rightll on occupancy tenan11.
1HE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE 1959
. " ·_ .: : ,
Devolution of righb of occ1:-
The amount of compensation, whether paid ir. Iump sum or
in annual instalments, shall be deposited in sud1 manner ·and form as may be
prescribed by the occupancy tenant wicl1 the LTahsiiar],1 for payment to the
Wl1crc the rights of a Bhumiswami in any land accrue to an
occupancy tenant ttnder th!s section, he shall he liable to pay the land revenue
payable by the Bhwniswami fa respect or such land with eflect fiom the date
of accrual of such rights.
I 91 . L(l) If tht; Ilhumiswam i 1n ,,1 hof<; fovour an order of rcstin:ption
is passt:d µ1:.dcr sub:-section (2) of:scc6on.189 Htils to cultivate sud, l:u;d pcrsClll
ally du1·:.ng clu; agricultur,d ycu next following d,e date on which tlte ordf'r
is passed, thc_occupancy l.{'Jla.nt may, within mch time as may be prescribed,
make 1an. upplication to·the Sub-Di,iiional Officer fol'.·res-toration oi such land
. ..·_ .Pr~~i<led .th~t. tlre. occ~p~cr .t~na~t !l~BJl not. be· entitled to make the
a,ppUcation. if he i~l ~n y way, olutructs .the. Bbumiswami in ta-king . possessio:iF.of
or cultivating. such land-.] 2
(2) · 'on reccip t of the ai:>plic~tion, tht- SubDivisi~nal Cflicer may,
after ~i~in:,; to ,.h~ BJ; mnl~wami :;in opp~rtunity
01: h/~1g heard and mak!ng
s1.1d1 further em1nt~y as may be deeqied nccessnry, .,pas?S an order_. rcstopmg
pi:>ssessio.n cf ,tl1e)ai1d_ in . 91r.cstion _n\ the occtjpan_cy . tenant,. a.,nd w}:Lcrc such
oi:de;r _is pass~d,: the: occupancy tenant s~iairhe placed 'in possession of tl~e
a(ihe corrime.11cement of the agricultural year next foil(Jwing . the, date of thp
order and the.rights of'Bhumiswami shalJ .then ,wcn;re to hjip am:l the provi
190 except sub-section (2) thereof shall apply acrorrlingly.
(3)' If'there·:i!l' any dispute rcg::irding th~ rent pz.yable for the land
r'e~torethmdcr sub.section ·(21. it sh a.JI bl~ decided bv the St.hDivisi<.-r7!.l · Ofiker.
\,\'here any land is restored to .m O<:cup.rtnr:y ten. 11t under sub-
srction (2).,. tlt.c Bhumi~wami against whom rt'.stmafon is onl~rcd. iJ1aH for
~,·er be d_cl;arrecl. frqrn claiming re.mmption of. rny. ,1:md of mch occupnmy
tenant: unqer section 18~--
[ th(; inter.st of a.n occt;p:;1.r.y· ~ei;a!.{t i11. _Ji:s ho/.dir;i rhaIJ. on 11is
cfo;Hl!, [Hl.lS by LiheritaJJCC' or .survivm~hip .ir. an~0rc'.:-,nre Y i-;11 his
19~. · (I) The tenancy of an c:~cn.ptr,cy tcn,r,t _In hr~ ho!dinr ohaH be
lfahfo 't" termination by an ol'dcr of t1lf~ Sub-Dh·i:;;jor.al Cfficc:r m&d1; on any
of the following grounds, namely. ---
he has failed to.pay-on Ol' _before dw _due date in any
agrif:u~tural year the rent of such land for tbn yc-ar; or
.(b) he has done· anv act whid1 is ·_destructive· or perman-
e1~ tly injur~ ou~ to the Ia nd ; 9r
. (c) ·h~. Tias used s{ir.h kmd for a·purpose otl~er than ag;icu1t~
he has transfor,..:<l l?.is intcri!sl in the faa<l _in contravcn-
· tion or··s~tion· -i95·.-
·:, · :_. ·(2)- , Xo-·order-:for the tt-rm-inati-01i of his righfR fri the, k~d. on ·tr.~' 'grot1J-~
sfiecifidHn·clause =(a) of S\il~eetion·(l) '~hrtll be Jl8·~~cdiunlei:.!' 'the' Sht)-Di\·isi~:,\~
Officer hri8 by notice co.llted upon tJ-,e occupnnc:-" tennnt to. tt>nder thc!"rerff ~'l!e
L:_:uhcr \1·ith cos! of proc(-cediil!;s wi,hin nicl1 rui,,d ac
may be ~pecified by
the Sqb-Hivi.c:ion:al Officer in. ·the nr,tic~ and ,be teivu1t lw.s· failed tn deposit
the ri::q.uirecl a1nOlmt.within- the. s:1~d J-'ie:tind,
1. Sub,. by M. P. Act 24 of E61, S. 7, for "Revrnue Officer".
S1.iOO by S.17~ ibid.
Subs. by r-t P. Act 38 of 1961, S,4.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. ,lffi
No proceeding~ on the grotmd specified in clause ,:b)ofsub-sec-
tion{ 1) shall lie unles.s the Bhumi~wami of such laud ha~ served on the occupancy
tenant a notice in writing specifying the act of destruction or injury complained
of and the tenant has failed within a periorl of ~ix months from the date of
'lt"rvicc of notice or within such further period as the Sub-Divisional Officer
may grant to restore the land to the <'ondition in which it was hefote- such
The following provmom shall be .ipplicab]e in the c.:tsc nf
every occupancy tenant who:;c tenancy i~ terminated, namely:-
Provisions applicable to ooat-
pancy tenant ,,hOl!C knaDCJ
if the occupancy tenant has, before the date of termina
tion, sown or planted crops in any land compri,,e in the
holding he shall be entiled, at the option of tl',e Bhllllli
swami of such land, either to retain possession of such
land and to use it for the purpose of tending and
gatherjng in the crops, or to rereive from the Bhunri-
swami of such land, the value of the Jabour and capital
expended by him in preparing such land and sowing,
planting and tending ruch crops, together with resonab
if the occupancy tenant has, before the date of termina-
tion prepared for sowing any land comprised in his
holdir,g, bu! has not sown or planted crops thereon, he
shall be entitled to rf'ceive from the Bhumiswami of such
l~nd .the valu~ of th~ !abnur and capital expended by
hllll m prepanng such land
an occupancy tenant shall not be entitled to retain
}, is land or receive any sum in respect thereof ur:der
~is section if, after the commencement of p1oceed--
l';1gs by thl" Bhumiswami of such land for
non, he has cultivated or prepared such land
contrary to local usage;
the nnt, if any,' payable to the Bhumiw,·.ami of 3ucP
)an~ by the occupancy tenant at the time of tc1:nr
mat1on may be set off against any sum payable 'to
the- occupancy t.enan t .under this section;
i_f the occupancy tenant has, before the, date of termina-
'.ton,. effectr;d any imprcivement on any land comprised
Ill his .h0Jd1~g, he shall be entitled- to
B1n:m1swam1 of mch -land such compensation for it as
after hearing the parti.-.:
The Rev~nue.Officer terminating the tenann
_if any, payable under sub-section {!).
No occupancy tenant shall be entitled to Wtnsfcr b,,,- w
shale, g1t, mortgage, sub-lease- or ntherwfac hi~ right in the fond or any' po~·o
t creo1, aud·evcrv such sal
e, . 1 , m0r gage, su - e-ase or other tJ'ansfer
e vo1. a e, as provi ed m ~ect,on 197 :
n. Provide~ _that a sub-lease may be gr.anted by or on beh;t]f of an
p;i ;y te(n~ut d such person bdongs to anv of the catcg:oril"~ mentioned
2,. of section 168.
~lanlidon, - for _the purposes of this section 1}-c expression 'sub-kase-"
f" construed as iaYmg- the same meaning as 11~sig-ni::d to 'Tea~e in
'ntE. MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
Right of certain person IO
apply to set aside ttallllfers by
Xotl'-ing in sub-section {l) shall prevent an occupancy tC'nant
.from ttansfnring his holding or any parl thereof by ~a!c or gift to :1:ny co-trn-
.vnt or any persou who, if he survived die tenant witl out nearer heirs, would
(3) !'lot~ing _in th;s .section shall prevent an occupancy tenant from
trruisfornng any nght m l11s }aI1d to securl" payment ol~ or shall affect the right
of the State Government to sell s1.1ch right for the recovery of an advance made
. to l~im un?-cr the Land Improvement Loan~ Ac:t, 11)83 (XIX of 1883), or tlu:
Agncult1msts, Lo~ms .Act. 1884 (XII of 1884).
Xothing in this section shall pnvent an occupancy tenaut from
. tran:ferring any right in his holding to secure payment of an advance made
. to him by a co-operative. sodety or shall affoct the right of such society to sell
·_sue~ right for the recovery of such advance.
Except in persuancc of a transfer permitted under any of the fore--
1 goi~g provisions, or in the ca.se of proccl'."dings for recovery of arrears of any
· aniiual instalment of compensation, !lO decree o1 order shall bc passed for the
sale of tlu; interest of a.n occupancy t('nan1 in hfo hc!Jing nor slu.i.ll ~ud1 interest
be attac.hed or sold in executioH of anv decree or order nor shall a receiver be
appointed to manage such holding under section .5 l of the C:ode of Civil Pro-
_cc,dure, 1908 (V of !908), nor shaH such int{:rest vest in the Court or in a
.receiver under the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (V of 1920).
An occupancy tenant of hmd h'eld for the purpose of agricultul"<." is
ent,tled to make- any imr-rowm,·nt thert>on for thr better cultivation of the
·land or its more convenient use for the purpose aforesaid.
If an occupancy tenant transfers his rights in his holding
or any portion thereof in contravention of section 195, any co.tenant or any
person who, if he survived the tenant without nearer heirs, would inher;t
the holdinsz or the Bh11miwsami of whom such.
person holds the land, may
apply to th<: Sub-Divisional Officer to be placed in possession and the Sub-
may in: accordance ,-vith the rules made under
·258: place the applicar1t iri possession subject to his acceptance of the liah1
litieil of the occupancy tC'.'lant for arrears of rent and for advance
for necessary expenses of cultivation.
Where more persons than one apply under sub-section (I),
they shall be entitled to be placed in possession in the following order of
any person who if he survived
the tenant would inherit tht
Bhumiswami of whom the occupancy tenant holds the I.and,
(I} Any occupancy tenant may, by executing in favour of th,e
Bhumiswami not less than thirty days before the commencement of the agri-
cultural year a registered document, surrender his rights and there upon he
shall ccse to be an occupancy tenant from the agricultutal year next following
such date. No surrendt"r shall be valid unless t'.ffccted by a
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Indian Stam!?s
Act, l8tJ9 (II of 1899;, or the Indian Rcg-istration Act, 1908
instruments of surrender executed by occupancy tenants in pursuance of the
. provi,ions of this ,r;ction, sh~ll be exemptf.d from payment of stamp duty and
rcgistrration fe,c- charge:i.\Jie thr-1eon.
11 it s,m·,,nkr bi:ing executed under sub-section
s,vam1 ,h,111 h"' f'1titl1 cl tn take possP.'Ssiot of ]and only to the extent of hrs
right of re,nmptirm uuler section l89 and L11c excess Jand, if any, shall vest
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 19.5')'
in the State Go\ernment and the Bl'nmiswami ,hall bt paid compensation
for ~nch execs~ land, which shall be equal to two times the rent payable
for un<let section 188.
Where 1;'-llY land ves~s in the State ~O":'crnment un?er sub-s~c-
tion (3), the Bhumiswam1
shall specify urh lan<l w1dlln t.he prescribed period
and in the prescribf'd m:umer and on his failure to do so within such period,
such lanrl shall be ~pecified ITT· the Sub-Divisional Officer.
After ~uch land. has been specified in accrH·inu: v. llL tLf p<,vi-
.si.ons of sub-section (4), the Sub-Divisional Officc-r shall demarcate it in accor-
dance with such rules as may be made iu that behalf and also fix the land
revenue in ·respect of land rcs~med by the Bhumiswami.
Every Bhumiswami shall g:ivc ::i written receipt for the amount
of rent at the time whc11 such amount is received by him in respect of any
land i11 such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.
200. If any Bhumiswami fails lO give a rC'ceipt as required by section
fo..- failu:re to give
199 or receives by way of rc::tl a1y ,uno;m/ in c:,;u:ss of the rent pa.yable un<ler
receipl 01 far excr:ssretm>o,ry.
this Code, he slla!l, oa tlte application of the occupancy tenant br liable by an
order of the Tahsildar to refund the excess amount recovered and to pay <tS
penalty a sum not exceeding two hundred rupees,
or, if double the amount
of the total rent recovered exceeds two hundred rupees. not exceeding twice
such amount and the Tahsildar may direct that the whole or part of such
sum shall be adjusted towards
the amount of compensation payable by thC'
If from any cause the p;,_yment of the whnle or any part of
pay ah le ia respect of any b.nd is remitted or suspended,
rent comrqucnt oo like tuat~
the Collector may, hy general or special order, remit or smpend, as the case·
may be, the paymenl of the rent, of such land, to an amount which would bear
the same proportion to the whole of the rent payable in respect of the land a.'l
the la'ld revenue of which the payment has been remitted or suspended, ~f'ars
to the whole of the laad revcnur- -payable in respect thereof, and may distribute
the amount so remitted or suspended amongst the occupancy ten"iits holding
such land in such manner as may seem to him to be equitable having regard
to the effect on their holdings of the cause which has led to the remisSion or
smpension of the land revenue,
If the payment of rent has been ~uspended, the period of sus~
pensfon shall be: exduded in the computation of the period of limitation pres-
el'ibed for the recovery of such rent.
The provisions of sub- sections (!)and (2) shall apply to land of
which the land revenue has been wh-o!Jy or in part released, compounded for
or redeemed, in a.nv case in which if tlie land revenue in reSpect of the land
had not been released, compounded for or redt:emed, the whole or any part of
it might in the opinion of th<" Collector, have. been remitted or suspended.
(I) If ary penon who immediately before the coming into force
of thi,- (.ode hdd land in any region in ary of the capacities mer,tioned in
section 185, has heen e;ecte<l or dispossessed. of anv land held bv him during
the threl" years immt"d.iately preceedin1i the coming into force r,f this Code,
otherwise than by pro.-:css of law, may witJ,in two years from d·e date ofcomi1'1i:?
into fore{' of thi~ r.ocle, ap-.Jy tn the Tahsildar for his reinstatcm.:nt in s1ch
If any person who on the coming into roree of this Code, holds
land as an orcunancy tenant has been ~ject.-d from or dkpos~essecl of anv land
held by him, after the c0rn.ing into force of this Cod,- in contmvention of its nro-
visio,~ 'll'l.Y withiri two ye;u:~ from thl" d<tte of s11~h ejP,ctment or dispossession,
3poiy to tht" Tah~il<lar for his r<"in~tatemcnt in such land
011 rcceiot of an annlic,i.tir:m nnr:ler _s)th-rcti<m (I) nr (2), the
Tahsild:ir ~lnll, flfter m1kin~ an enquiry hto th.~ respective claims of the parties,
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND Rl=:VENl.1E O.>DE, 1959-
~   J .. _'.
:~{ : ~~::_r .... "."irii.\'\"" t~ i,~.}~ ... -1.)~
J:=:. -, ... r.1 l--~-. ';,· ;i:n .:~ l ·
""'~,-, ,,- ,,_,, t
r ec1 c t e app cation an
wlH.:n he ordc.n tl,e rc~torarjon of die po.s:;ession
occupancy tenai1 t, put him in possession of the land.
(4). TI_1e Tal1sildar may, at any stage of enquiry pass undci: sub-
SCCb?~ (3) _an int~m order for han_ding over the possession of the land to the
a.J?p~ca1~t, if he f1nd~ that he was t:J~ct_ed or disposses~d by the opposite party
w1thU1 ao.: months pnor ~o the subnuss11;1n of the application under _ .sub-section
(1) or (2), and the Opposite party shall, if necessary, be ejected unda his order,
When an -inte:rim order has be_en passed under sub-3ectio11 (4),
the Cl>ppos.ite party may .be reqwred by the Tahsildar, to execute a bond for suc.b
sum as he may deem fit for abstaining from talcing posse~sion of land until thr
fiu.al order is passed by l,iru.
If the person c-xeruting a bond is found to have ente~d into
of ~ken possession of the land in contravention of the bond, the Tahsildar may
forfeit the bond in whole or in part and may recover such amowil as an arttar-
of Land revenue .
(7), If. the order pasM:d under sub-section (3) is in favour of die
applicant, the 1 ahs1ldar shall also award a reasonable compensation to be paid to
the- applicant by the opposite party :
· Provided that the amount of compensation shall not exceed ten times
the revenue of the land for each year's occupation.
awarded under this !leetion shall be
recoverable as an arrear of land revenue .
The Tahsildar shall have the power to review su~moto casea
of wrongful ejectment, or dispossession,
whether by surrender or otherwise of
occupancy tenants ir1 any areas to be notified by the State Government in this
behal£ Wliere action is taken under this sub-section, the provisions of the
foregoing sub-sections shall, as far as may be, apply,
Alluvial land formed on any bank shall
vest in the State
Government but. the Bhumjswami, if any, of the land adjoining such bank
~hall .be, entitled to the use of. the allm'ial land w added to hi,5 holding free irQD'.l
the payment of Ian d revenue during the cqrren t term of SC"ttlern~nt, _i. u~l~ss
thr: area added to his holding e,i:cecds one acre.
_. _ (2) · \iVltcn tht" area-of the alluvial laJ1d added to a holding e.x~ds
, ont: ll:(;rc, and it apµean to th(" Sub-Divisional Officer that such land'. may,· "''1th
. due tegard to the int~rcst of the public :convenience and public reve~ue, be
· disposed. of;, he shall offer such 1andAn Bh.umiswami rights to the BhumiSM1~
of :mch holding ~:t a premium \rhjd; shall not exceed twenty times the fair
;1gressmtmt of the land so formed. If the said
Blnunisw:uni shaH tefu!'le the
offer, the Sub-Divisional. Qffic<-r may dispose of the land
_ (3), Where any holding i's dimi'1iish~d ;n area by c:liluvion
,r:xi<:nl .i,;rt:ater thaa on(', acre,_ the 1.md ru .. ;enuc. pa-yabk
CH sudl holding wall
204 _ ( I':
The Sub-Division:tl ·Officer ~hall have power, gubjecl to ru1e!!
qndcr Lhis Code, to
asses, ~di incre-as<:- and reduc1io11 in land re\c1tt1c
v,hidi are required or permitted under this Chapter_
The $nh~DivisiouaJ Officer shall also 11a,c power to decid,- ,~iv
dispue which mav arise relating to tI1e dtstri bution of alluvial land ;smon,. thr-
vartOLJ~ Rh~i.miswamis claiming snch land.
S11b·:~. l-,,:- .\--I. P. Act ~j uf 196..J. -'--~.22 f~---:rr ~~tr.. accordance ,..._,-;~~;_ -~f"Ct~f;t1 162 1
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE· CODE, tffl
(i) .. "Consolidation of holdings" means the redistribution of. all ~
aay of the land in a village, so as to all.ot to the B_h~swanu
coutiguous plots of land for the convenienc.e of c:ult1vaton;
cconsolidation Officer'" meam a Revenue Officer, not below
the rank of a Tahsildar, appointed by the State GO\'aru:nent
distriet or districts to exercise the powers, and to
porfonn the duties of a Consolidation Officer under thiij Codo.
.AJJy t"-'~ or more Bhumiswamis _in a village holding togethn
not le5!1 than the min.imwn area of I.and prescribt:d by rules made under sec
tion 221, ma}' apply in writing stating such particulars as may be prescribe?
by ruks made under !ttction 221~ to the Oomolidation Officer fo1
dation of their holdings.
The Collector may of his own motion direct the Con.solidati(')n
Officer to m,.a.k.e an enquiry into the feaaibility of con.soUdation of holdings in any
If two-thirds of the Bhumiswamis in a village apply for con-
solidation of their holdings or if in the cuurse of an enquiry into an application
made under sub-section (I) or sub-section (2) two-thirds of the Bhumiswamis of
the village make an application agreeing to the consolidation of their holdings,
· such application shall be deemed to be the application on behalf of all the
Bhumiswamis of the village.
If in a case falling under sub-section {3j, any scheme of conso-
lidatiou of holdings is confirmed, it shall be binding on aU the Bhumiswamis of
the village, and on any persons who may subsequently be entitled to hold OJ'
In any other ease, if any scheme of consolid21 tion of holdings is
£onfirmed, it shall be binding on the applicants and those who have agreed to the
con!olidation of their holdings and on any persons who may 911bsequently be
entitled to hold or occupy the land affected by the scheme.
If on receipt of any such application or at any stage of the
proceedings thereon, there appears to be good and sufficient reason for cUsallaw-
ing the application or for excluding the case of vny applicant from considf'ration,
the Consolidation Officer may submit the application to the Collector with a
rec0mmendation that tht' application be rejcct{.d in whole or in part, or that
the proceedings be quashed.
The Collector, on receipt of the recommendation, may accept
. it and pass orders accordin~ly or may order further inquiry,
If the Consolidation Officer admits the application, he shall proceed
to deal with the same in accordance with the proct"dure laid down by or under
If tht" Bhumiswamis making the application undei· section 206
· submit a scheme of consolidation of holdings mutually agreed to, the Consolida
tion Office,, shall, in the manner laid down by rules madt" nnde,· 5ection 221
examine it and, if necessary, modif.v it.
If no scheme is submitted with the application,
lidation Officer shall prepare a scheme for the consolidation of holdings in the
mannn laid down by rules made under section 221.
l'rq11ualion of ~· '.~'-_
con ,oli<lation of hotding,r.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Rf&bt of Uhumitwamis to
Transfer of righb of Bb.umi
Ko imtrument neee1U.rf tG
lf the Cons~lidation Officer is of the opinion that the redistribu-
tion of land lil accordance with a scheme of consolidation will have the result of
allotting to any Bhumiswami a holding or Jand of a less market or productive
value than that of his original holding or land, the sd1eme may provide for the
payment of compensation to such Bhumiswarni by such person or persons as the
Consolidation Officer may direc..t.
When the scheme of con,olidation is complete, the Consolidation
Offi.cCr, after considering and as far as possible removing the objections, if ;inv,
ma.de' to the scheme, shall submit it for confirmation to the Collector.
When the scheme of comoli<lation is complete, and if all the
Bhui:niswamis affected by such scheme, agree to enter into p=ession of the
holdings allotted to them thereunder, the Consolidation Officer may allow them
to en~er into such possessio,1 from a date to be mentioned ln the sc;h~me.
The Collector may either confirm the jcheme
modi~cations or refuse to confirm it after considering the oqjection or objecticms,
to the scheme of consolirl<ltion and the reCon,rnendation of the con-
The decisio:i of the Collector, subject to any order that may
be passed in rvision by the Settlement Commissioner under section 50, shall
Upon confirmation of the schem(" of consolidation, the Con-
solida:tion Officer shall, if neec.,nry, d<'rnarcatc the boundaries of the l1oldings
a-nd shali proceed lo a,mo1ncc the decisions finally mcide and cause to be pre-
pared; in ac·<'orda~ce- with the sd1~n1e, a new field map, record-of-rights, other
reconjls prescribed under section 114, Nistar Patrak an<l \.Vajib-ul-arz.
The acw record$ prepared u:1<ler sub-section (1) shall be deemed
been prep;wed under Chapter IX or XVIII, as the case may be.
The Bhu:ni»wami affected by the scheme of consolidation, if thtY
have ,not entered int1_1 pos~c~~io,l under ~ub-scr:tion (5) of sectioa 209, shall be
entitled to posscs,io:1 of tl1e holdings allotted to them under the scheme , fro.tn the
commencement ofthe ngricultnral year nt:!xt following confirmation; and the
Cons0lidation Officl:'r shall, if necessary, put them, by warrant in possession of
the holdings to which they are entitled ;
Provided that if all the Bhumiswamis agree, they may, after confirmation,
be put into poswssion of their holdings by the Consolidation Officer from any
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, the rights
of Bl)umiswamis in their holdings shall, for the purpose of giving eff<"Ct to any
scheme of consolidation affecting them, be transferable by exchange or oth~-
wise and no person shall be entitled to object to or interfere with any transfer
madC for the said purpose.
The Consolidation Officer may also transfer by exchange or
otherwise any la:1d belonging to the State Government where such transfer is
necessary for the purp03e of giving effect to any scheme of consolidation.
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being
(a) no inst:-ument in wntrng shall be necessary in order to
effect to a transfer involved in
carrying out any scheme of
co>solidation. of holdings; and
(h) no such in~trnment, if executed, .~hall require registration.
Cose. of carrying out ,chcme.
The Consolida.tio!l Offi,-.er shall, unless the State Government
for suffi.cie,1t rc:i.som di-r'!ct~ otherwise, recover from the Bhumiswarnis whose
THB MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
ho,ldings arc affected by the scheme for consolidation of holdings, the cost~ of
carrying out the schemr:, which shall be assessed in accord,mcc with rules made
The Consolidation Officer shall ap;,ortioa the costs among the
Wlumiswamis hable to pay tl1cm a-;cordrng tn occLcpic<l area of the holdings
affected ·by the scheme,
Any amount payable as compensation m1der sub.section (3) of
section 209, or as costs unde1 section 215, may be recovered as an arrear of
21 7. ,vhen an application for the co:15olidation of holdi.1gs has been
admitled under section 208, no proceedings for partition of the holdings which
will affc:ct th0 scheme of consolidation shall be commenced and u.ll such pro.
eeedings pending shall remain .in abeyance during tht" continuation of the con~
Whrn an applir.atiori for the r.on~olidation of 'iolrling:; bas been
admitted, no Bhu.;-nls\vami U?On whom the sc:hcme will Le biH<ling shall have
pow~, durit1g the continuance of the consoJ:dation proceedings, to transfer or
otherwise deal with a,1y part of his original holding or land so as to affect the
rights of any oth:::r Bhumiswami thereto u11der the scheme of co:uolidation.
A Bhumisw:imi shall have the same rights in the holding or land
allotted to him in pmsuance of a scheme o[ co.<noEdation as he had in his original
ings during currency of oonw-
Transfer of property during
Rights of Bhumiswamiii after
If the holdi:1g- of any Bhumi;-,w.-tmi brought under the scheme
Of consolid,ttion is validly burdened with any lease mortgage or othf'r t'ncumb-
rance, such k<W!, mortgage or oth,~r e11eumbr:mce,
attach to the holding allotted
to him under the scheme
or to such part of it as the Co:isulidatiori
rules that may be m:lde wuler srctio_1 221, may have appointed in preparing
_the schem!; a.,1d thc:re,1po.,, the les~c, m:Jrta'\'.2~ce or other encumbrancer, as
,the ca~e mw b~, ~lull r,ease to have any ri~ht i,1 or a;p.inst the land from which
the lease, m-:>rtg.'lge or other encumbrance has bee:1 transferred.
Notwithstanding- anythin.~ contained in sub-section (I) or any
other enactment for the time being in force the Conso1idation Officer shall, if
necessary, put any les<see or any mortga!:\"ce or other encumbrancer entitled to
p03iCHio.1, by warrant i~to possession of the holding or part of a holding to
which his le'lse, m::irt<2;.'l~ or other enrumhrance has been transferred under
The Sta.te Government may make rules for the purpose of Powertomakerulcs
carrying into eff~ct the provisions of this Chapter.
In particular and without prejudice to the gener.1\ity of the
the State Government may make rules-
(a) prescribing the minimum area of land to be held by the person~
making an application under snb-section (I) of section 206;
{h) providing for the particulars to be contained in any application
made under section 206;
providing for the procedure to be followed by the Consolidation
Officer in dealing with applications for the consolidation of hold-
ings and for the appointment and constitution of any Advisory
Committee or Panchayat to as.~ist the Consolidation Officer in
the e,c:amination or preparation of the scheme;
(d) (or ,foterrnining the compensation to he paid in case~ falling
(ii) for regulating the assessment of costs under section 215;
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 19$9
(J) for ?etermining the market or productive value of the differa:it
holdings and land~ brought under any .scheme of consolidation; .·
(g) for the guidance of the Consolidation Officer in respect of a.he·
transfcz: of t-ncumbrancC& a.ud lca&es under section 220; and
(h) generally for the guid~ce of the Consolidati0tt Officer and oehor
Officers and persons m all prQCeedingi. uuder lhi& Chapta,
Subject to rules made under sect.ion 258, the Collrct<>, may
appeint for each village or group of villages one or more patels.
Wben there are t'"·o or more patels in a villa,e, the Collector
may dimtribute, subject to rules made undtt section 258, duties of the office Qf
paie) in such manner as he may think fit.
Where in the Vindhya Pradesh region, a patwari has becm
performing the duties irnpOlled on a patel under this Code immediately before
the commencement of this Code, he shail continue to pertorm such duties and
shall be deemed to be Patel for purposes of this Code, until a Patel j5 appointed
under wb--scction ( 1). ]1
The remuneration of patels shall Le fixed by the
accordance with rules made by the State Governme.nt.
224. It shall be the duty of t'very patel--
(a) to collect and pay into the Government treaswy land ttvenut
and cesses payable through him and suC'h other Govern~t
dues ordered to be collected by him ;
(b) to furnish reports regarding the state of his village at such
places and times as the Collector may fix in this behalfi
as far as possible to prevent encroachments on wruite land,
public paths, and roadways in the village~;
(J) to prcsc-rvc :.uch stations and boundary marks erected in his
village by surveyors in the service of Governrnen t as may be
made over to his care and to report any damage caus-cd to
subject to rules made under section 258, to keep the villa@(' in
to prcvrnt unauthorised cutting cf wood or
removal of any minerah or othn properties belonging to the
(g 1 to coii trol a.nd superintend the_ kotwar. to report his deatli or
absence from his duty and to take such gteps as may hf: nt:ce-
ssary to compel him to perform his dutifls;
(h) to perform such other duties a:-;
m:i.~· Ix prc~crjberl l-1\ rn~
made under section 258.
Slth1. by l<I. P. Acl 24 of 1%1, S .1$.
THE MADHYA. PRADESJI _LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
225. If by any enactment for the time being in force, any publi~ d1;1ties are
jmposed on or public liabilities are decla1ed to attach to landholders, their mana-
gers or agents, such duties shall be deemed to be imposed upon and such liabilities
shall be held to attach to patels appointed under this Code :
Provided that nothing herein contained shall discharge the land-llc-lders,
their managers or agents from any duties or liabilities otherwise impol\Cd upon
Subject to rules made under section 258, the Collector may remove
ti·om office any patel.
227. A Patel who is found negligent in the performance of any duty assigned
to him under section 224 or 225, shall be liable under the order of the Tahsilder to
a fine which may extend to twenty rupt"es.
228. Where a· pate] is temporarily unable to perform his duties, the
Sub-Divisional Officer may, on his application or otherwise, appoint a substitute
for a. period of not exceeding, six months and
the substitute so appointed
shall, for all the purposes of this Code, be deemtd to be a pate!.
229, Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, the State Govern-
ment may entrust the manaRcmen t of a village or the pe.rformance of the duties
entrusted to a patel, to a Gram Panchayat or wl1ere a Gram P~nchayat has
not been constituted, to a Gram Sabha constituted in accordance with the
provisions of section 232.
For each village or group of villages, there shall be appointed,
in accordance with rules made under seclion 258, one or more kotwars for the
performance of such duties as may be prescribed :
Du.ties imposed und~r any law
upon land holden deemed to
be imposed on patels.
Entrustment of village mana-
ApPointment of kotwan M4
Provided that in tl,c Madhya Bharat region the duties of kotwars under
this section shall- be performed by the Police Chowkidars who shall on the
coming into force of this Code, be deemed to be kotwars under this' section,
anrl be subjt:cl ir1 all re~peets to the control of Revenue Officers.
Every pc1son who at the coming into force of this Code l1olds
the_ post of a village watchm~m in the Bhopal and Sironj regions or of a chow
kidar in the Vindhya Pradesh region shall be deemed to be a kotwar undet
[231. The State Government may, by general order, subject to such
restrictions, terms and condfrions as may be mentioned therein, fix the remune-
ration of Kotwars eilher prospectively or retrospectively hut such retrospective
effect shall not be from a date earlier to the 1st March, 1982.] 1
(l) For th~ purpose of the managf:'mcnt of a. village,
Government may establish a Gram Sabla for a village or a grnup of villages
for which a Gram Panchayat has not been constituted under the law in force
The Gram Sabha shall consist of one Chairman, one Secretary
and not less titan three other members who shall be elected in the prescribed
mancr by the adult residents of the village or group of villages for
the Gram Sabha is c~tablished.
The term of the office of members shall be five years.
Every Gram ·sabha shall be a body corporate and shall have per-
petual succession and common seal and shall, by its name. sue and be sued. Sub-
ject to any rules made in this behalf, it shall also have power to acquire,
or transfer property movable and immovable, to enter into contract:. a;id
do all things necessary for the purposes of performing the dutieli entrusted_ to it.
I. Suhl.. by M. P. Ac1 31 of 19B2, S.2.
1llE MADHYA PRADESH ·LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
Record of unoccupied land.
l''fq)ataiaa of Ni5tar Patral:.
Every Grarn Sabha shall establish and maintain a fund and into
such fund shall be paid-
a. ~urns recovered as grazing fees and such other fees and income
ansmg from the management of the village as the State Govern-
ment may prescribe; and
sums c?ntributed by the State Government or any local body
or any private person.
. Such funds shall be applicable to the payment of ch~rges and expenses
mc1dcntaI to the several matters under the control and administration of the
The Collector shall exercise supervision over
the working of the
Gram Sabha and may _for sufficient cause dissolve any Gram Sabha and appoint
a!ly person to perform its fuactions until it is reconstituted.
In any village or gr011p of villages for which a Gram Panchayat
under:the law in force relating to panchayats has been established, such Gram
Panchayats shall perform the
duties imposed upon and exercise the
of a Gram Sabha under this Code, and the Gram Sabha shall cease to exist.
The State Goverr.ment m;1y, by notification, delegate to the Gram
Sabha S!lch of the d:.lties of the Patel or any other function in connection with
agI"icuhural or industrial development of a vil1age as it may think fit.
Rights in abadi and unoccupied land and its produce
233. A record of all unoccupied land shall, in accordance with rules
made in this behalf be prepared and maintained for every village
unoccupied land set apart for exercise of nistar r.ights undor
[Sub-Divisional Officer] 3 shall, consistent!}' with the
provisions of this Code and the rules made thereunde1·. prepare a i\1ster Patrak
embodyine- a scheme of manaiement of all unoccupied land in a_ vi!la~e and_aU
matters incidental thereto and more particularly matters specified in section
A draft of the Nistar Patrak shall be published in the village
and ~fer ascert~ining the wishes of the residents of the village in the pre-
scribed irut.'lller, it shall be final iscd by the [Sub.Divisional officer.] 1
(3) On a request heing made by the Gram Sabha, or where there
is 110 Gram Sabha, on the application of not less than one-fourth_ .0 : the
adult rrsidents of a
village, or on his own motion the fSub-D1visional
Officer]8 mn.y, at any time, modify any entry in d 1 [' Ni11tar Patrak after such
enquiry a1 he deems fit,
!\-tau~ to be pro,itled fr,r
2,s. The matters which ~hall be provided for in
in N i.itar PatTak.
shall be as follows, namely:--
{ a) term, and
conditions on w11ich gra,:ing of cal tie in the
village will be permiHed;
(b} the terms and conditions on ,.vhich and the extent to which
any res.ident may obtain-
'"ood, timber, fuel or any othr~r forest produce;
\Vc,rd "and" ornilt,-d by 1'.L P, Act 25 of !')cA, S.:n 1:;',
Omitted by S.23 (ii), ibid,
Subs. by M. P . \ct 2+ of 1961 _, S. ~, fo,. "Collector".
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE~ 1959
(ii) mo01am, kankar. sand, eartll, clay, stones or any other
(c) instructions regulating generally the grazing of cattle and the
removal of the articles mentioned in paragraph (b);
(d) any other matter required to be recorded in the __ Nistar
Patrak by or under thi!! Code,
23'5. tn preparing the Nistar Patrak as p1ovided in
Proviaiop in Nistar Patn.k
Clollector shall, as far as possible, make provision for-
free grazing of the cattle used for agriculture;
removal free of charge by the residents of the village for their
thr concessions to he granted to the village craftsmen for the
removal of the articles specified in clause (b} for the purpose
Subject to the rules made under this Code, the Collector may
i-,e,t ap.i.rt unoccupied land for the following -purposes, namdy;---
for timber or fuel reserve;
for pasture, grass bir or fodder reserve;
for burial ground and cremation ground_:
(e) for encamping ground;
(f) for threshing floor;
(h) for ,ikinning ground;
for public purpo~es :such
as schools., playgrounds, parb,
road, lanes, drains and the like; and
for any other purposes whid1 may be prescribed for the
exerci,e of tight of Nis.tar.
Lands sN a!)art 'lpccially for any purpose mentjoned in sub-
section (I), 5hall nN othcrwi,e he diverted without the sc-llCtion of the Collector.
W1ierc the Coilcctor is of the opinion that thi- waste land of
any village i~ insufficicut and it is in public interest to proceed unr-\er this :o.ce-
ti_oi,, he may, <1.ftcr ;s;ucft ".:nqniry as he deems fit, order that the residents_of the
v1llagC' ~1-wll have a right of nistar or a right of gr,,zmg cattle, as the ca~ ma'!"
be, in the neir'.hbonring village to the extent o;pecified in the order.
(2 \ The reside:-iN of a village having a right of grazing cattle ia
11-!e neighbouring village u'ldcr imb-section {I) or Government forest may make
an application to the Collector for recordir.g their right of passage for the pUl'-
pOl!e of exercising the rights.
If, on enquiry. into an application made uncler !!llb-section(2),
the Collector finds that the right of passage is reasonably necessary to enable,
,,_!r.h ,.,.si'°'~nt~ t" e:o:e::-(:i~e ~ !'i.gh: 1-.... :;!':':Ze th~fr c?.ttle i:,; ?.riy 0ther ~ .. m~e or in
the Government forest, hf' shall pass an order declaring their right to such
passage and shall state the conditions upon which it shal1 bt ex:CN:illed,
Collector to set apart Ja.nd_
for exercise of Nistar right&.
Rights in wa,ste land of
THE MA..DHYA PRA.DESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Rights in fruit bearing trees
planted in un-occupied h,.nd,
Measuns lo prevant thc:fl ,
of dmbt'r from Gavemment
. (4) . The Collector shall further determine the route of passage, and
shall restrict such route 111 such m~nner tJS to cau~e minimum inconvcnjence --"
to the residents of the village through \vhich it passes.
The Collector may, if he thinks fit, demarcate such route.
Orders passed by the Collector under this .section shall be
recorded in the Nistar Patrak.
vyhere th: .villages mentioned in sub-section (1) lie in different
the following provision~ shall apply, namely:-
the orders specifying the right of ni~tar or the right of gr.i:iing
cattle shall be passed liy the Collector in wliose district the
village D\'er which sud1 right is chimed lies;
any orders regr.rding route. of pMrngc sh,,JJ be
Collector in whose respective jm isdiction the area over which
passage is allO\ved lies;
the Collector pas~ing an order in ,tccordance with clames (a) and
shall consult in writing tl1c other Collector concerned.
\Vhcre, before the comjng into force of thi5 Code any fruit
beari~g trcf' ·was plan tcd by any person in the unoccupied hind o( any viHage,
and 1s so recorded,
then notwithstruicling tl1:i t sur h land ve~ts m the State
Government, such person, and his surcessor in interest shall from generation
to generation be entitled to pos~ession and usufruq of such trees without pay
ment of any royalty or other charge whatsoever therefor.
Any person desiring to plant a fruit bearing tree in .t~e un-
occupied land of any village may do so wilh
the previous permission of
[Tahsilclar]\ and the provisions of sub-section (1'1 .shall, as far m may be,
apply to tlii. frnit hearing tree,
planted in ac~o;-dance ,vith the
obtained under this snb.~ection.
The right conferred under thi~ section shall be tranf,.rahle >
but the person planting-the': frL1it I.waring tree or his successor in interest shall
hove no right to the c<)rpus of me!-. tree or the land on which it stands.
If anv dispn tc arises under this section it shall
by the [Tahsildar ]1. \vl1ost'; dccisi 011 shall be fin;:. l.
The State Government may make rules regnl~ting t_he grant
of permission and the exercise of the right conf'crre<l under this section.
If the State Governmrnt is of tle opir;ion that the cut,1n.g of
ck: tr irncn ta! to pub lie interest or tl· at j l is pccessary to prolubn or
regulate the cutting of certain trcco for prtJ\'Oding erosion of soil, it may, by
rule, made in th i.~ hdi ,Jf, pr oh i bit or rcgula te the cu ttiiig of such trees whet~u
such trees stand on the land 11elongiHg to Bhumis'wa.mi or on land belonging
In framing rules under sub-section (I), the State Government
may provide that all or an,, of the rule5 shall 2pply only to such area as the
State Government may., by notification, specify.
control, rnanagernen t, felliiig or rem ova I of th·e forcsL
belonging to the State. 9'overnmer:t.
g1 owth on the lands
If the State Government is satisfied that in order to prevent
the theft of timber from anv Government forest it is necessarv in the public
interest to regulate tl-e fcllin'g and removal of timber in the viliag~s comprised
in anv area adjoining such forests.,
tJ1e State Government may, · b:, an order
published in the Gazette, declare such area to be a notified area for purpos~
l. Subs, by M. P. Act 24 i>fl961 S.7, for."Revenue Officer".
11IE MADHYA fRAD~H LAND REVENUE CODE, U59
sub-sec ti on ( l) sl1 all
proclaimed in the prescribed manner in all the villages
section I 79 but
subj en to the provisions
of sub-section ( 5), wb en an order
claimed in any village w1dcr sub-section (2), no person shall in pursuance of a
trar saction of sale or for purpo&;s of trade or business tell an) timber tree in
any holding ir such village or 1 emove the corpus of any such tree from any surh
holding except in accordancf' with such rules as may be made in that hehalf.
Any person \vho contravenes or attempts to contravene or
abets the contra\e-rtion of the- provisions of sub-section (3) or of any rule made
the1e-1rnde1, shall, without pr{'judice to a,1y other actior, that may be taken
againt him, be liable on
in writ;ng of the Collector,
penalty not exceedmg 011,- thousand rupees as may be imposed
fuTther order confiscation of any
contravention of the provisions of this sub-section,
Nothing in sub-sections (3) and (4) shall apply to the felling
or removal of timber
trees by any person
from Us land fo, his bona-fide
agricultural or dom<'stic purposes, if such felling or removal is otherv.,ise in
other provisions of this Code.
As soon as may be after this Code c omcs in to force,
in the pres,ribed manner,
record the customs in each village in regard to--
(a) the right to irrigation or right of way or other easr-ment;
(b) the light to fishing;
in any land or watt-r not belonging to or controlled or managed by the State
Government or a local authority and such record shall be lcnO',l.'11 as the \.Vajib-
The record made in pursuance of sub-:;ection
manner as may be
Any person aggricwd by any entry
mav, within one year from the date of the publication
sub-~ection (2), institute a suit in a civil court to have
made in such record
of 6uch record under
such en try cancelled
The record made under sub-section (I) shall, sul:ject to the
qeci~ion of the civil court in the suit instituted under sub-section (3), be fina
The (Sub-Divisional Officer]l may, on the application of any
person interested therein or on his own motion, modify an entry or insert an)''
new entry in the vYajibul-arz on any of the following grow1ds :~
(a) that .ill persons interested in such entry ·wish to have it modified;
(b 1 that by a decree in a civil suit it has bern declared to be erroneous;
that being founded on a decree oc ordi::t of a
civil court or on
the order of a Revenue Officer it is not in ~ccGrdanct wid1 3qch
decree or order; or
· (d) that being so fqunded, such decree or Qrdel" has subsequently
been varied on appe'-1, revisio.µ Of review; or
(e) that the civil court has by a dei;:~ deterrp.ine~ anr . ~1:1stop:i
existing in the village.
Sub- by M. P. Act 24 of 1961 S.4, for "Collc~tol"l>,
nIB MADHYA PRADESH . LAND REVENUE. CODE, 1959
DispoM1 of abadi &it1:1,
Righ b to hold hou1e ~ite free
llight of penons holding hOU11e
Cott-~2t43.. (Iti)fi . Whereh tht area reserved for abadi a in the opininn of the
....., or 1nsu c1ent
urt er area rom the unoccupied
e Vl age as
e may think fit.
the St te G (.2)
Wherr unoccupied land for purp0ses of abadi is not available
overnment. may acquire any land for the extension of abadi.
The pr~~~ions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (I of 1894),
sha I_ ~~ply to such acqmJ1tmn and
shall be payable for tho-
acqun1uon of sueh land m accordance with the provisions of that Act.
Subject to rules made in !his behalf the Gram Panchayat or where
~ Gram Par:chayat has not been constituted, the Tahsiidar shall dispose of iite1
m the abad1 area.
A buikling site of reasonahle dimensions in the abadi 5haH not
be liable to the payment of land revenue if such site is occupied by a kotwar or
a person :who hold~ land or _wo,ks as an agricultural artisan or an agricultural
labourer m such village or in a village- usually cultivated from such village.
Subject to the provisiom of section 244 every person who at the
coming into force of this Code lawfully holds any land as a l1ouse site in the
abadi or who may hereafter lawfully acqui1e such land shall be a Bhurniswami
ir , respect of such land :
1[Providcd that the allotment of house site under Gramin Avas Yojna
to a landless person on or after the commencement of the ?Yla<lhya Pr.adtsh
Land R.evenue. Code (Amendment) Act, 19i3 shall be subject to the following
(i) that the allottce shall build a house on such land within a period
of [five years]2 from the date of allotment;
(ii) lhat the allottee shall not transfer tlie laud allotted to him. or h~s
it1terest therein during a period of [ten ycars) 3 from the date· of
(iii) that in ca~c of breach of any of the a hove conditions tho land shall
.. vest in the State Gov:ernment ""ith effect ri-oin the date of breiµ-.b,,
E:r.planation,-For the purpo~e of this section "Gramin Avas Vikas
Yojna" means the scheme sponsored by the Government of Ir dia for the pro-
visicm for house .sites in rural areas whcreunder, on 100% grant assistance from
the 'Government of India,
the State Governments are to provide house ·site
free ·or cast to families of landless workers in rural areas who do not alrea,dvown:
a house s:tc or a built up house or a hut on land of their own.J
Government's title to minc:ru.
· 247 .... (l)
Unless it is otherwise expressly provided by the terms of a
grant made. by the Government, the right to all rnincrallt mines· and quarries
shall vest in the State Government which shall hav~ all powers necessary for the·
pro~er enjoyment of such right!.
· · .. · · ·
The right to all mines and quarr'it5 includes the right of acces., to
land for the purpose of. mining and quarring and the right ·1:0 occupy such othlf't
land us may be necessary for purposes subsidiary thereto, including the erection
of offices, workmen's: dwellings and machinery,
the stacking of minerals and
deposit of refuse,, tl1e construction of roads, r?,ilways or tram-lines, and any other
purpo,ses ...,+ich the S_tate Government may declare to be subsidiary to mining
If the Government has assigned to any person its right over any
minerals, mines or quarries, and if for the proper enjoyment of tiuch right, it
is nece,sary that all or any of the powc:r:s specified in sub-sections (I) and (2)
.should be exercised, the Collector l!Jay, by au order in writing, su~ject to :ruch
conditions and reseriations as he may specify, delegate such powers to the pttlOn
to whom the right has been a~gned:
i . Added l.,y M. P. Act 29 if. 1973,' S.2.
Su.bll. by M. P. Act 9 of 1975, S. 2(1 ), far "olle year''.
3. Sub. by S.2(ii). ibid, for "live ye:us''.
THE MADJ-IYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
Provided that no such delegation shall be made until notict": h~s be~n ~uly
'SC!'Ved on all persons havng rights in the land affected, and then obJecuom
have been heard and considered.
If, in the exercise of the right herein.referred to over any land, the
rights of any person ate infringed by the occupation or d15turbance of the
!!urface of such land
the Government or its assignee shall
persons compensation f~r ~uch infringmtnt and the affi:ow~t of:su~ comperisation
:ihall be calculated by the Sub Divisional Officer, or, ,f}us a:"'ard 1~ not a:~epted,
by the Civil Court, as nearly a! may be, in accordance Wlth the prOvlSIOni of
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).
No as.,;ignee of the Government shall mter on or occupy the swface
of any land without the previous sanction of the Collector, and unless_ the
compcnsafion has b~en determined and tendered to the persons whose nghu
Tf an assignee of t_!1c Government fails to pay compensati~n as pro-
vided m sub-section ('f1, the Co!lcctor mav recover such compensation from
him on behalf of the pcrsom en titled to it, a,; if it were an arreat of laid re\ enue.
(7) Any person who without lawful ai1thorityextractl! or removes mineral!!
from any mine or quarry, the rig-ht to which ve~ts in, :md has not beeD assigned
by, the 0°vernment shall, without prejudice to any other action that m::iy be
taken agamst him, be liable, on the ordc-r in writing of the Collector. to pay penalty
iiot exceeding a sum calculated at double the m-arket value of the minerals so
cxtrac ted or rernoved :
Provided that if the sum ,o calcubted is less than one thousand rupee,,
t~e penalty may be such larger sum not exceeding one thoLJsand ru1.c<'"s a:. the
(8) . Without prejudice to the provisions in sub-section (7) the Colkrtot
may seize anct confiscate an, .. m_ineral extracted or removed fro1n any mine or
quarry the right to ,vhich ve;ts in, and has not been assi~ned by the G~vernment.
~ Explanation.- In ths section, "minerals'' include any sand or clay which
the State Govc1nment may declare to have a commercial v<1.he or to be required
for any public purpo~e.
(I) Any person who unauthori~edly take5 or re.maim in possession
of any unoccupied land, alMdi, service land or any other which has lJecn aet
apart for anv special purpme · under ~cction 237 or upon any land whicb i11 the
property of Government, may be summarily ejected by order of the Tahsildar
and any crop which may be standing on the bnd . nd any building or othor
work which he may have constructed thereon,
if not removed by him within
such time as the Tahsjldar may fix shall be liable to forfeiture.
so forfeited shall be disposed of as the Tahsildar may direct .ind the
removal of any crop, building or other work and of all worh necessary, to
restore the land to its ori2,inal condition shall be recoverable as an arrear of land
revenue from him. Such person shall aho be- liable at the di~cretion of the
TahsildJ.r to pay the rent of the land for the period of unauthori:;ed occupation
at twice the rate admissible for such land in Jocality ,,11d to a fine which may
exte11.d to (five thousaildla rupees and tn a fi1rther fine
pation or pos:5ession continue, after the <lat~ of first ~;ectmfc'nt. The Tah~jldar
roav ~ppl~ the. whole or any pa.rt of the fi11c
to compensate persons, who
may Hl his opinion have suffered loss or injury fr0m the: encroacheroent :
Provided that tbt' Tnhsilda-r shall not exercise' the powers conferred by
this sub-S('Ction in regard to encroachem~n t made by buitdings or works con-
in the Mahakoshal region---
(li') in areas other t1-.an the tnt'.rged States befc,re the first day of
I. Suti.. by M. P. Act 15 of 197L S .-i.
~ Suhs~ h)' M. P~ Ac1 44 of 197-4, S.2(a.)t for~ *"o:ae thotlsand'" ...
tuing· po.:!eoJ<ion of land.
nlB MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE~ 19S9 ·
(It) in the merged States, before the third day of April, 1950 ;
in the MadI1ya Bharat region, before the fifttenth da) of August, 1950;
(ii,1 in the Vindhya Pradesh region, before the first day of April, 1955;
(iv) in the Bhopal region, before· the eigth day of Novembe.r, 1933; and
in the Sironj region, before the fast day cf July, 1958.
E:splanati0n--For the purposes of this sub-section "h.1erg(;d St.ites'
hall :have the meaning assigned to it in the Madhya Pradesh Merged States
Laws: (State) Act, 1950 (XII of 1950).
(2) It shall not be competent to the Tahsildar to impose a fine of amo-
unt exceeding [one thousand five hundred]t rupees but if in any case he consi-
ders that circumstances of the case warrant imposition of a higher fine, he may
refer the case to the Sub-Divisional Officer who shall, then, after giving the
party concerned an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders in respect of
fine as he may deem fit.
[(2-A) If any person continues in unauthorised occupation or posse,.
Mion of land for mor,e than seven days after the date of order of ejectmcnt
under sub-sectioi:. { l), then without prejudice to the fin~ that may be imposed
therei.Lilder: the Sub-DivisinaJ Officer shall cause him to be apprehended and shall
send him with a warrant to be confined in a civil prison for a period
of fifteen days in case of first ejectment and three months in case of
second or subsequent ejectment:
Provided that no action under this sub-section shall be take11-
(j) unless a notice is issur-d call.4ig upon such person to appear Le-
fore the Sub-Divisional Officer on a day to be specified in the
notice and to show cause why he should not be committed to
jn r~pect of encroachments on Governrnen t and Nazul l~nd
for the settlement of which the Government have issued orders
Provided further that the Sub-Divisional Offict:r may order the release
of such person from detention before the cxpil'y of t~e period ~f',ntioned in
the warrant ifhe is satisfied that the unauthorised possess10n has been vac,ned ;
Provided also that no woman shall be arrested or detained under this
The. State Governmen: _may make rul~s for the purpose of
carr-ying into effect the prov1S1ons of sub-section (2-A) .]1
No oTder under sub-section (1) shall prevent aµy pcnons frQxp
establishing his rights in a Civil Court .
(I) The State Government may make rules for rcgulating---
(a). fishi.ng in Government tanks;
catching, hunting or shootin~ of animals in villages; and
: · L ·subs. by M. P. A<:.tfi· of 197~, S.2(b). for «two hundred a_nd fifty".
Ins. by M. P. Act 12 of 1976, S.2(1).
!. Omitted by S.2(2), ibid.
nIB MA.DRY A PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
tl!e removal of a.tl'' materials frnm landlo bclongint:: to the
Such rules may pro\'ide fer the i~n,e of permits, the condi
tiom attaching to such permits and the imposition of fees there for and other
250. [ ( l) lf a Bhumiswami is dispossessed of the land otherwise than
in due course of law or if any person m1authorisedly continues in possession
· of any land of the Bhumiswami to the use of which sucl:. person has ceased to
be entitlt"d under any provision of this Code, the :Bhumiswami or his successor
in interest may apply to the Tahsildar for restoration of the possessi.011,-
{a) in case ofBhumiswami belonging to a tribe which has
been declared to be an aboriginal tribe under sub-section
(6) of section 165,-
(i) before the lstJuly 1978 in cases of unauthorised disp-
ossession prior to the I st July, 197 6; and
(iiJ in any other cases within five years from the date
of dispossession or from the date on which the pos-
session of such person becomes unauthorised, as the
(b) in c-ase of a Bhumiswami not covered by clause (a), within
two years from the date o( di5possession or from the date
on which possession or such person becomes unauthorised,
as the case may be.]1
[ (1) For the purposes of this sec ti on and sec-ti on 250-A
Bhumiswami shall include occupancy tenant and
[(l-a) Tf a Bhumiswami is dispossessed of thr- land other-
wise than in due course of law or if any person ·
unauthoriscdly continues in possession of any land
of the Bhmiswami to the use of which such person
has ceased to be entitled under any provision of
interest may apply to the Tahsilda.r for restoration
in case ofBhumiswami beonging to a tribe which
has been declared to he an aboriginal tribe under sub-
St"c tion (6)of section 165,
before the 1st July 19 7 8 in cases of unauthorised
disposse- ssion prior to the 1st July 19:6; and
(ii) in any other cases within five years from the date
of disposscs<1ion or from the date on whic.h the possession
of such p1mon. becomes unauthorised, as the case may be;
(b} in case of a Bhumiswami not covered by clause
(a), within two years from the date ofdisposse$ion or from
the date on which possessionof such person becomes
unauthorised, asthe case may be.]3
1. Subs. by M. l'. Act 61 ot' 1976, S.6.
2. Jn$., in iu applicati17;r; t<; Scheduled A~as, by Govc.-mment of Madhya Pradesh. Revenue
Notif1cat1on F. No. l-70-VllN-2-83, dated the 5th January, 1984-. iS11ued
by the Governor of }1adhya Pradesh under sub-paragraph ( l) of para graph 'i of the Firth
Schedule to the Constitution of India, published in the Madhya Prade.ioh Rajpatra (Asadha-
ran), dated the 6th January, 1984, pages 23-29.
Existing sub-section (I) rc,numbered as sub-section (I-a) in itli application 10 the Scheduled
Area, by Government of Madhya. Pradesh, Revenu~ Department's Notificatfon F. No. 1-70-
VII-N-2-83, dated the 5th January 1984, wued by the Governor or Madhya Pradesh under
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 5 of the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of India Publiihed
in the Madhya Pradesh Rajpatra. (Asadharan) dated the 6thjanuary, 19Bf, Pa.;, .23-29
11-rE MAD!-IYA P~DESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
LLc T~si]Jar m:1v 0J1 comin<> to know 1/-ia, a 1:Hinm·
o,ernn,u\t esscc .as hecn disp(x.5e,.,,d of his land
t,· ·1 n 11J cl
ue c urse o
aw, suo mo :
l'he Tah~ildar sr. a !l aft e1 m{l king a11 , ; , o nir~-- int( t!·
c \J1,':nS o t e_ rarues, c;1de _the ap_pl1cano:i :nd wl,c;, he ord,:r:e the n:~t~rai inn
of tI~,:, po~session to the Rn umisw<1m1, put L.im i,1 po.,sessinn of tl,c land.
[ _ (2a) , The ~roccedi11gs s.t<-Lrtcd under this !'t:ction ;hall, on receipt of
reply from the _o_tl1e1 party'. ,ontmue from day to clay ur,!e-s~ for reasons to hr
recorded i,, wt1tmg a lo'}n·Gr .:1dio1rnna Et is co,·,,1·(1~rF-,1 ,..~("»< 0 -r,- "l'.., ·
case a c npy oJ the orclc:r sh <:et
containing tl1 r n:;;sons for sud 1, adjournment
s;uU be ,;cJH to th{' Colle,_;tor.Jl ,
The Tahsildti] mz:.v ;1 t am· s:::: l'C 0/ th.: CJ -( l :rv 1·.,·, 0
.... ,( ..... ~
tion _ (2 · ,i.n iiiterim order for handing over d1 e po,,-c'.t~icn of tht land to ~.re
appl1:=ant, _if he finds tlrnt l_1c, w::c. di.,pt,c;~c--~ul hy d!c cppocitc parry 1,,-itliin six
mO'lthS pnor to the subm1ss10n of tlic applic:ation unc'er iJ-i~ i·ection.
a c,ue the oppo~itc f!Nty shnH, ifnccessi'.!'y he tjcc1rd under 01·dr~rs of the TahsiJ.
Tho Tahsildar may at any st;,ge of the enc ui1 y pass nn iterin1 order
for handmg over the possession o,r
the land to t~~ Bh~miswami, occupancy
wna1t or Governmi;:.1t lessee, ;1s Ute <.;ase may be, if .r;e fnds th;lt he was dis.
posses,,:d by the opposite part)' within ~ix months rri01· 10 11:e
the application ot· cnmn,r:.1cr:mc1H of sur;.mo,u pr,JC(;<:dings unde-r this scctiol:I.
1n ,uch '" rc1.sc the
op,;rl~1te party shdl , ,;f ncccsrnry, be rit\Jrci nii.::kr orders
of the Tehsi!rc:br.] 1
\Vhc;i nn interim order kig been passed wakr
opposite ,l«rly m:-iy 1,e required hy the Tah.',ildar to execute a bond for sncl1 sum
as the Tahsil(b: 1.1ay de(~lll fit for abstaining from t2.king possession of land
until the final o·de-r is passed by the Tahsildar.
tf the per;;or. e-xecuting ;i buru'. i~ found to have
take;1 possession of the land in contravention of the hond, thf' Tahsildar may
forfeit the b,,:.d in whole or in part :ind n/1~, n,covcr r.uch arn01'!lt as an arrc11.r
lf the o,dcr pa~scd unck, <.'..- 'iction (2) is in fovonr of the appii-
1ut the Tahsil&.:r ~hall c!ls0 a,,..-""rd cr"·"'re.,s;:,tj0r, ro br paid to
hy the opposite party ,,·hac:h sh.dl be ar. the prorata rate of t'wo hnr>drcd and
fifty rupees per hcctart' P-r year.]2-
The compematiOH awarded 1w.,\!:r 1!·,, secti,m ,],,,,: L1· ,.,~coverablt".
as :m · arrca:· of bnd revcJ,uc.
\Vhen a:1 order has been p:c~&::l under sn1_,-: ,,, tion
restoratjn,1 of the possession to thi· BhP:'.'.li<\\<:tni d:c Tal;~_i11.1,,: m2y rcquirc t~e
oppmite party to cxr:cute a bond for Htch rnm_ as the 1 a/?ldar may deem, !a
for abstaining: from taking possession of tlw !""r\d vl contraventirm of the ord!'r.J a
\-Vhere an order ha
p,1.ssed under suboecti rn1 (2) for
rcnorntion of the pnsse~siO'l cf ti C Bhuuisw:imi, the o.,po,i,c party shall also
br lirible to fine which may extend to fiv~ !housand rupees :
l. I11s., in its ar:,olication l.J Sr,heduled Area;;. by Govcn.\nCT1! of Madhya Pra?~sh .. Reven~e
Department's Notifica rion F. No. l  70-VlI-N-2-83, elated the 5th January, lll-,4, _111~ued , '.lY
1he Governor of :VIadhya Pradesh under sub.paragraph (1) ,;f paragrapb 5 o! the F1tth
Scherlnle to the Comtitution oflnrlia, p11bfoh~d in the Madhya Pradesh R,-i1patra (Asadha
ran), dated the 6th January, 1981, pl'ges 23-29.
2. Sub~. by M, P. Act 15 of 1980, S. l L
Added by M. P. Act 15 of l97L S .'i.
TI-IE l\ii/, iJff1 A f'RA DESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Provi kd that it 1h:-d' nf,i_ L>e c rnpt>te;1t to the T«L .rn_l.
10 ,l,!j'Us(: ,l fi;,e
of .i.mounl exceh_lirig one thvu .. ~:m<l five bmdrcd rurcC'"~ hut if in a,Y
considers !hat c:rcmnsti1.nces ul thc::
case; warrant impo,iiion of a higher fine
he may rdcr the c«se to the Sub-Di\ isional Oiiiccr who s]1;11l, after giving ihe
party cru1ccrned an op!-J"rtwsity ()f belng heard, p,ts~ snd-, (,nk:·, :n re:sec:< of
fine -as h~ may detm ht. P
ff any person continur.& ,n w1au!l'nti~ecl nf'rupatioH
posse,$i<m of laml for more than seven
days after the ch,e ,:,f O(ckr for I esto-
ration of posscs,ion under sec, ion '.::50, then without prc:u,::,_.: ,,, the compc,1·
satior1 [Fi.ya\..,le- 1mdcr ,nb-,:ccti,:,q (6) or the Lr,c
,_iJ,-;u ,;ut (9) c,{' ch:
said :,ection tl:e Sub-Di\·i:i(.)r:,·-1 Off;,·,::r- J~;,,l] ,.,,u~c hin: ,., L, ,;.pp,,bcr,'->:d a'",i
shall semi him with a wnrnmt lo be conf;,-,ec] in ?. C'-.i\ ;,nc,,_ 1hr;, period ut'
fifteen day,. in case o! firs+. order fc,r res1or2rion of pos.,i:;,,_/.;: :md ~];:,JI
him t.n be apprdwnckd :ind ,Lall ,end him with a
warr~r,t 10 he ,·rJJ>Jii,ed i;,
sud1 prisnn for a period (-f tl1rcr· mo;"llhs in rpu: of ~econd or ,1:Lccc1ucni f'rc.icn
for resto,·:i.tion c,f the pm~e;~ion 10 ,,uch Dhum~w~m1i:
.Pr,:wided that nu ac1ion ur,der thi~ secr;0n ~},_;))! be ,dcrc u;dt·i, .-
is issncd calbig- upoll such pcrrr·:, to ,mpear before the SPb-Di\·isinnal Officer
on a rbv tc, he; sp,~rificd in 1.lw 1w,1c(' :i.nd to shew cau,e why be ~honld 1;01 be
commin,xl W t:1t ,.'.ivil [.ri,ir,.,:
Pt ovided further th1t the Suh-Divis.io;1al Off:,cr nmv ordcT die rclase ol
such p->.1H lrom dct,~,tricn lwfrm~ the f:xriry of the.
period mclltiont·d iu the
wmT,1-Ht if lL: i, a1ti,[ie.J th.lt th,~ 1mc1,ut;,ori~~d pnssession has beea vacated :
Provided ;,b, t~·,:it '1') \\·r.ri-1il11 3hall be arrested or drtaiPed under this
Tht' St.ttc Gn1-"Jttmir·nt mav mah; n,!cs ror the purpose of
car:-ving i.,1to dT~ct thi: ptovi-,iorn of ,.,:ih-sf:cti<Jll (!). ]2
All Lank:; situ:-itcd i"in
date of co:ni.1g into fore of tlw Act, providing [<Jr the abolition of the rightll
of bter,n··diMic~ in the a.rea cnnccrned and over which membcts ,if the village
comn1·uity were:, immc,J;,-,_r,+ b,_,fnrc such date:, c;,eu-;·ising rights of irrigation
or nistar, sh;i\l, if >1ot alreo.dv ve-~tecl in the State Gn.ct'lment, vest :,hsol,,·,·1:.
in the St;,te G,,vernmcnt with effect f'rom the Gth Apri1 1959 :
Provided dut ,,,:>thing iH this ~t·,:tion shall be ckcn.~e·d tn ;dki.;, ,L;,y r,gh
of a 1,~.,-,,,.t'. i1 1.111:: t:nt; '1'1'1·0 r;. kt~-:: s:_th~isti:q· on the c'..Hc ofvcstir:>g C t'.w tan.k
which sh~;ll l,e f'cxerci.-,tble to the cxtPc'll nnrf sub1cct,  the terms a-,: c-nditioi:s
specified in the k,1st: ;
Provid~d farther that no tank ~hall w-st in the State Government. 1mlcss--
after 1m1kini;,; such enquiry as he chcms fit, the Collector i:; satisfied
rk1t the ti'.nk fullillo :h~ conditions lair:\ dowr in this su\,~sc-ction;
untie" b.-.s b 1.'. '.'1 '-''J·ved 01t the 1.1ar,;<,~ i,iterc~ted and
givc11 to tl,em for being licard.]3
A:w persm1 chimini,;; in any such tank any interest other than thr-
ri.,rht ,~f ·,tT'.,-,a{i,;n or nist;ix, m',1\', witl~in a neriod of [ four vcars ]4 l"rom the
d~te of vcsti,,g rmder snh-,;ectio1~ (l 1,
mak~ an ap;,1:cation .in the ;:,r 1·scribed
form to thi!' C".l!l;;:.;t~r for compe11:1atio11 in respect of his int '~rest.
[ (2-a) The provisions nf section 239 shall apply to trees
the emba:?1kmeJ1ts of tank vested in the State Government under subsection
(1) a<1 th!!y aonly to trt-e~ planted in an unoccupied land,]5
I. Ins. byM. f. Act 44 or 1974, _S.3.
2; Jn~. bv M. P. Act 15 of 1980-, S.12.
3. Subs. by M. P. Ad 38 of 1961, S .5(i).
+. .Suhll. by S. 5(ii), ibid, for "two yean".
5. In,. bv S. ~, (iii); ibid.
Confinement in rivil r,ri,oo on
failure to rcstol'e p;,w,_1si,m
t1nder sectiPn 2 ~{I.
Vesting of t~ds iu SH11e
f"iovt~rn men t ~
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENtJE CODE, 1959
Such compensation shall be fifteen times the Jand revenue asse5"3abJe -<
the land covered by the tank and for purposes of assessment such land shall
be treated as irrigated land of the same quality as the adjoining land.
The compensaion as determined under s~b-section (3) shall be paid
. Y the qollector to the person or persons proved to his satisfaction to be awning
mterest m tb.e tank concerned.
'isc} (5) Th~ payment of compensation und~r ~!>-section (4) slal! be.a fuU
arge of ti. e State Government from all liablltiy for compensat1on in res-
pect of the tank ~oncerned, but _~hall not prejud~e any right in respect
of such tank t? which any other person may be enutled bv due proce~s of Jaw
to ~orce_ against the person or persons to whom cotnpens~tion has hetn paid
The State Government may make rules providing for the regulation
of the" use of water from such tanks.
The vesting of any tank under sub-section (1) shall not affect the
~ights ~f irrigation and nistar in such tank to whic,h ~.ny person :is entitled
immediately before the date of ves1jng.
[ Expla.uation.-For the purposes of this ~ection, tnnk includes the trers
standing on the en:i,bankments of the tank hut dces not include LuiJcEng~, tcn·plts
or other comtructiom standing on the embankments thereof.Ji
It shall be the duty of the Gram Sabhn 10 m.ianta.in and keep
.in proper repairs th~ works of public utility in the ,-il!ag, .
Subject to rules made under tliis Code, the Gram Sabha may, by
order in writing, call upon adult males residing in
the village (except tho~e
who are old and irPrm or subject to any physical disability) to perform such
labour a~ it may specify in the order for keeping in a proper state of repairs
such works of public utility in the village as may be notified by the State
Goverrmcnt in that behalf.
(3) No order under sub-section
(2,1 shali be pa~:ed unless the works
are of public utility and are likely to benefit genernlly the persons against whom
the order is being passed.
A person required to perform labour un?cr thl' _ provisions ?f sub
section (2), may have it performed by another on his be~alt or pay for its per-
formance at such rate as may be determined by the Tahsildar.
Ar.y person who iieglects or refuses to perform the Jabour referred
to ir sub-section (2) or fails to pay for the pe1formance of Jabour ,:;s pro,·ided
in sub-section (4) sha]J, on the order of the Talisik'rr, 1::c little to ray 11r; amo-
utit <qual to the value of t11e Jabour at the rates dcte,rrnired Ly tI.e Tabildar
un-ler sub-section ( 4), and such amount shc.11 be recoverable us l'U ~rier.r of
(1) Except as otherwise providt.d in this Code, ti.ny
acts in contravention of the provisions of this Chapter or rules rna~e then1:11.~cr
,:,r who contravenes or fails tn observe cny rules or custom entered m tl,e ,\ tljib·
ul-arz or commits a breach of any entry entered in the Nistar Patrnk shall be
liable to such pen:?lty not exceeding one thournr.d mr,ecs .is th Sub-Divisional
Officer mav, after giving such person an opportunity to be heard, deem fit. and
the Sub Di,isionaf Officer may further order confiscation of any timber, .i.breu
p1oduce, or any other ·-produce which such person mny have appropriated or
removed from lands belonging to the Su-te Government.
Where any contravention, breach or nou-obse;rvan<'c punfrl,able
under sub-section 0) has been committed by the Gram Sabha, every Officer
l. Im. by M. P. Act 38 of 1961, S.5 (iv).
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE ~f/t~. i :1~:59
hearer of die Gc.lm s:i.:,1n sh;ill lw Ji;1l)I, ,n·I~,. tlut rnb-~cction _unlcs~ h: p1:')vcs
that the co.ttravcntion, breach or non-ob:;en·,rnc(~ took _Plact: w1tho~l his L::':;
le:lg.: or tliat he cxGrciscd all du,: <liiigcnce to prcvc:lt ,·.IC\ ,_·o·c'.nvention. bn.ac
\Vh!'.":n> the Sub-Divsiona\ Officer pa<;Se~
c1.n order imposing a p(:nalty
under \his section. he may dire.r d1;,t the whole or an;, part of tl~e penally .m:::
be applied to meet the cOM of ~uclt measures as may he necessary to pn::vc .
10 ..,, vr iitjiuy to c1l<.: public owin~ tn mch conlravcnt1on, breach or non-nb~e1-
AH)" function a,~ig11e<l to a Gram _Sabha under this
be performed by the patd until a Gram Sahha 1~ rluly co:1,lituted
\Vith ,1 vi'=''' 1n hri~:; .~gricdn:r:tl i·c0:,omy lo a hi;_;!_u:r Je\:d 1:f
the G;1,crnrnc:.1t ni:.;, by rule:,, n~~nlatc ~laildanh of cfl1c1c11l culti-
Such rules mi\) provide for the isstcc of directions a, reg<trd~ the
method; of agriculture to be adopted, the use of imi:-roYe<l seeds, conscn<atioJ1
alid proper utilisation of manure, ~ak of ::.urplm [Podgrains, and for c.:nsuring
proper wages and te1ms of employment of agricultural :vorkt:r~,. <UJ~t such other
directions as may br: necessary or clesffalik for the effincnt uuhsation of l;imfa.
Such rulc3 shall apply 10 agricul1t1risls who rn!tivav- personally !;:md
of sud1 limits as may be prescribr:d.
If n.n agriculturist to whom such rules <tpply W1dtcr sub-~cctjOJl (3)
fails to rnrry oul the direction~ is&ut-d under sub-section {21, lhe State Govern-
ment may have the dircctioas carrie('. nut by <my other agencv in such tp;rn~.rr
as it deems ht and rL·c0ver lt om him all such ro~t as rua)' be' incmrcd.
Subject ~o such conditions and to the payment of .~uch fees as may
be p1cscibed b)· rules made unde,r this Code, all revf'nnc rccnrds, maps anrl
land records which have been rrepued or are required to he prepared or kept
umlcr this Code- or any other cn.,clmcnt for the time being in force, shall be
open to thf" insp~ction of the public at rc:csonahle hours, and certified extracts
therefrom, or certifin] copies thereof,
~hall be given t~ all persons apply.iug
Except as otherwisG provided in thi~ C:o<le, or in any other enact-
ment for the. time being in force, no Civil Cvurt shall entertain any suit instituter¼
or application made to obtain a decision or order on any matter whirh the
State Government, tl,e Board, or any Revt"Jlue Q,1, ,., i
y 1his Code, r.m-
powcre<l to determi;,r:. ,kcirk or di~/1'~e of. anrl i'l narticub1
prejudice to the gt:nerality of this provision,
no Civil Court shall exerc-i~
jurisdiction over any of the following matters :-
any dccfaio.t regarding the purpo5c to which land is appro-
priated and er section 59;
(b) any question as to the validity or cffb::t of the notification of a
revenue survey or aty q_uestion as to the term of a settlement;
(c) .1,1y claim to modify a decision tletermiiiUlg abadi mnde by a
Sr,ttlem: 1.t Office1 or Collector;
(i' any claim :i.gain~t the State G'lV<'"rame-,nt to hold land free of
land rn·c-n,w, or at less tha:i t1te fair as~e~5ment, or to be assi-
g:nc<l ln whole- ,,r in r~rt tlic hmcl ·<Tvcnur: a:;sc~~ed 0;1 any hmd;
Perfouuancr of duties of Gram
l'racdptiun, of standard of
map~ and land ru-ord~.
nm MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
tin: .i.mounl of hwJ revel 1,e ;1~'e~;ul er rcr.)cn,d l;n<lc-r t11h
Cc,de or :.u,y 01hcr enactment f('r tlw tin.c Leing in foN e;
(() an;· d,,:rn ,,gain;t thf. St;I((' GO\'tTLW(111 10 J1;n-e a1i;; cntry
made iu an\· kmd record~ er to ha,e auy ~l.!rh c1nn ·lmit1~
any l!ll~tioii rt'garding tl1e
fixing of boundrry mark~ under Chapter X;
~ln) claim ~1gai1,~t the State GonTJll1H'.·nt <:oHnect«l \\ith or
-trising out of, li1L· collection of lnnd re\·enrn· or lhe rK·overy
of a1,~ ~um which is recovcrable as land rnen11e under this
C:nrlr" nr ::11;: othr-r <"lW< tnwnt:
any clam, against tl;e State Go,ernn cJll <,1 ::.g.iil1s1 ::t Revenue
OfficcT for remission or ~uspemiou of fo1cc!
revn1w:. or for a
derb·-·ti.oJJ tk1.t <Tor, havt" fai11-ll iu ::1;~
(/ <rn:, deci~ion 1·cgan!ing .lorfeitun; In Glse, uf certain tr.i:g~fors
((: cjcctnient of.1 ksst-e of;1 Hhumi,,1ami w1der sub-Y'cti011 1:-~) of
[(l) any claim to ,et 11sid(·
mb-section (1) of section 170 and clause~ (a) and (b)
~tion (2) ofseetion 170-A;l1
ejectmoit of a Government lc&-;1;e under SN:t.ion 182;
resuniption by a Bhumi~\1·anii of la11d hdd by an 0<·cupam:y
tenaut under section 189 and the fixation of rent of land left, if
any. with the occupancy tenant;
(a) dainH by occupanc~ tenant.~ for ,:onferr.il of the
Bbumiswami under section 190;
section 19 J ;
(q) termination of cenann· of ,in 0H1.1p;,r:cy tcmint umkr ,(Ttion
<l.11\" claim tu ~el .iside tr::mfet· l,\ ;.n ()(("\iJ::>.l-ll:'
~uspm1sio11 ;ind remission of rt'nt nnd('r section 201:
(11) Juy deci'ilon regan\:ng 1cin-su\truent of a wrongfoll~ tj-crtcrl
occup.1n.-:::-· lenrmt mH.kr sectiou 202:
1,rnou11t pay;.Wc ;:~ ('ompensation
section 209, co1firni:1tior or Lhe til.:ht·nw for coll'olidat101, n1 hol-
clim:, nndcr ~tion ?!O. trrm;frr, of right~ :J1_ c.111;:in~ 1,i 1 the
~d1cme under ~1ion 213 and as-;c_-:smcnt and apportionment
of ,:o~ts of consolidation of l10Jding; 11ndcr section 21 l:
«nr dr,"<.:isiou reg:.irdiJlg reimt:11m,:,nt of a Bhumis\vami i111pro
.<;11b. by ~-L f'. :1.ct HJ of 1984, S.'.;_
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODI:, ii/59
.. -;ny deci,.ion regarding vesting of 1.mks in Stale Government
under scc.tiun 25 l and ,u I y claim against the Sta le G ovL-rttrotnt
.~n y cbi111 against the S lntc Govnnmen I to sd aside or modifi·
any p1emiurn, penalty, cess or 1a1c impm,ccl or asse,sed under _the
provisions of this Code or an) otlit:r tnac trne11 t for the tun~
being in force ;
(;:-1,, any claim against tl1c Ste1te Go,,crnment arising under section
255 regarding prescrip tinn ol
(,i:-2:/ any claim 10 compel the pnfnrm, 1nrr of an') dutv imposed by
chi;; Code 011 all\ Rewnue Officer or other offi~er appointed
1[257-A (l,, In any proceedings under sub-sec1ion (6) of ;;ection lfi5, or
unuer the proviso to section 169 or under rnb-seuion (1) of section 170 or 1wdeI"
section 17O-A or under section 250 in vihich o;;,, of tlie partic~ is a Bln,miswami
belongin,i;;; to a tribe which has heen declart:d to he an ahnriginal tribe under
sub-St'ction (6: of senion 165,
the burden 0f proving the validity of tnm!ier
thcrcnnder shall, uotwith~tanding anything cont:1inccf in this t'ode or iH any
other 1.1 . v for the time lwin~ in force, lie on ,he pt:rson who claim, surh tran:-:for
::'.\:o legal practioner ~ha11 app~,1r, pltad or :1r t on hch.~Jr nf an) party
in any proceedings specified in sub-sectiou (l ;, in which one of 1hc rarti~ is a
Bhumiswami belonging to a tribe which has ken declared t0 be an ahorigina.1
tribe und("r sub-section (6; of section l 6.-1 except with the written permL~on
of the Rc,-'enue Officer/Court heforc whom th1" r:ast' is penr1ing.l
m.iv make rule.~ grneralh fo1· the
purp0;,1! of carrying into effect the provi~ion~ 'of thj;,; Code.
Tn particular and with om prejudice tt> the generality of the foregoing
powers such rnles may provide for-
the tem1.s anr1 condition~ of ,r:r. in, of 1l-w Pre.~idni 1 ,incl memhtn
of tht" B<.Jard or Revenue cons ti 111 tKi under serti on 3:
the prcscriptimi of the dutie~ of Suptrint!:"Jldcntc of Land Recorcl's
,md A'lSistant Superintendent~ of Land R,:·cord5:
ori divt:rsion of land
tn 11ther putp0:';Cs and imposition of pr<',.miurn under <re,::t.ion ."39;
a~sessmcn t on 1mas,-;cs..';f:d land under sectiol, 60;
form;uion of sun·1,y m,mber'. an<l villagt:~ 1.mdt.er section 68 and the
of survey n 11111 l :,f'l"s r: 0mprising land 11s~-0 for
agrin1h ura I purp0e«;
<li,is.ion of .sunt:\ Jiumber~ irnr, sub-division, ,md ~,ppnrtionment
<,f the ~c;se,~"llwnt of survev number nrnon~ the rnh-di\'i~inn, nr~,
\Urvey nurn brr under s-ec1 i~1n 7 0;
prescriplion of rt'<·ord~ in wJiirh arc:... anrl
assei:m; ♦nt of survt·l
uumbcrs and suh-divh:iom of m-vey numher.~ 5hall ht·· ~ntered
uuder sert ion i l ;
the manner of dividing :i. village inw two r,r mnrt' villa~i;f'!I or
nnitiug twri or more villages into onP,: or constituting rilla~i- or
alt~ring the limits of a village uncle,-
l. Ins. Ly M. P. Act 61 ol' 197ti, S. 7.
Bun:k □ nf prnof and bar .of kgal
· G,·neral rule ma Ung powtr
THE r.JADHY A PRA.DESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
the n l"co~vy in qui, ., ,, l Lie!, ~hall be u:m pki ('d ancl the form in
w hid, ,1 n d the particulars 11-i th which the propri~al~ for assc~srncn 1.
r:1tc ,hall 1Jc forwarded unrlc,- ~e-cii,_>J' ,;, :
the manner in 11,hi'ch notic!' or :i,,~esnncnt shnll Ll: given 11nde1
(he manner of iPquiry imo the prol1 ts of agricuhun., :incl into the
value of land u,ed for agricultw-e and JWiH,gric11! tural puqi<!sc,;
th r: regulation of the con duet c,J rcn·n 1_ ,c su11°ey or se l t /en,cn 1 11 ndc1'
rcgula tion of division of lands in urban are;;s in to p lht numbers,
reco,gnition of existing sUJvey rnunbcrs us plot Humbcn, reconstitu-
tion of plot nnmbers or fornrn tion of new plot n um bcn under section
tle mannn of dividing
apportionir,g the asstssnwn t of plot number among the ,11 h-divi~ions;
and the limits either of area OI' of bnd revenue or 1.Jotli in .:my local
for recognition of suh-divisio,1s under section 94; ,
prescription or rCC<lrcb under section ~1:,;
prescri p ti OH of otl1er special purpose~ unde1 section 96:
the mu:rncr of ['11.hli~hing
the standard rates under ,,ection 97;
the n1ecnner of keeping record of all registered s,des ,md len5!:'.~
of Ian ds under sec lion 98 ( ! ·,, and
dl"termin:cition of the ::ixcn\g;e Bnnual 1e11ing ,,81ue
, 1ll der si:c1 I ,)'d
prescription of other duties of pat,\nri, 4ndcr sulJ-,eu.ion (2) c.f
p rcscrip tion of other duties of R cvcnue Inspectors under section 106;
rir·t$cri p ti on of nth er particulars under sec ti on
1 U i (2) ;
the prescription of the form of, and tl;c additional rarticulars to b,
entered in the papers to be included in the record of l'ighL~ under
sec ti or IO?;
form of acknowledgcmen t to b, given by patv. ;-i.ri under section 109;
(a) pre~cr;ption of rrgister under scctior i 10(!1
acquisition of rights ,·eJ)Or t e d under section 109 ;
(b) prescription of other persons and autlicri!ics to whcm written
intimation shall be given under sccti on
I l G (3):
pn~scription of ot}i er Ian cl records under sec tio11 114 (I),
presrdption of fee on the payment of which Rac,id Bal:i shal:
be prov i cled under section 114 ( 2 ; ar.cl the pre~ cri p tt on oJ
of t:'1 tries which it shn 11 contain:]~
the regulation of rr.qnisition of assistance under section 120;
prep~u a tion, main ten a nee and revision of land records under
l. Subs. by M. 'P. Act 16 o· 1985, 5.5.
2. Subs. by M. P. Act 24 '.lf 1961, S. 19 (it
8111». by M P. Act '2:1 :Jr 1964, S.24· (i",
THE ~ADHY A PJtADESH LAND REVENUE CORE, 1~59
manner in whicl1 objection shall be dispo~l ot by 'l ahsildar
undei sectiou 123(3) ;]1
(a) specification of, and manner of construction and maintenanci;:
boundary marks of villages and survey numbers or plot
numbers under section 124( 3) ; ar.d
(b) the manner of dio;tribution of the cost. of construction oi nev,
boundary marks among UlC holders of lands und(,'f" section
the manner of demarcating boundary rr.arh bc-twt_cn a Yillagc
rO<!,d, village waste or land reserved for communal purposes and
tht- land adjoining it and the manner in which Lhey shall bf' kept
in repair and renewed;
the procedure of demarcating the boundari('s of 5urvey numben,,
sub-divisions, or plot numbers; the natun: of boundary marks arid
the levy of fees under section 129;
the dates on which and the imtalments in whi,h land nxenue shall
be payable and the persons to whom and the place; whereat such
instalments shall be paid under section 140;
the form in which receipt shall be given under section 142;
the regulation of remission or StJllpeDSion of land revenu<" wider
section 14-l( 1) ;
the guidance of Revenue Officer~ in is.suing notices of demand
under section 146 and exccu ting the processes spcci fied in section 147;
prescription of the form of application [for grant of annuity, the
time within whjch such application :;hall be made]\I and the con-
ditions of such grant under section 160;
the regulation of r1.,-duetion of revenue durii1R the currency of
settlement under section 161;
{xmii) pregcription of the ceiling limits of l:md under )·ectir>u 165;
prescnptiou of thf' manner in which land forfeitc<l under section
166 shall be selee!f'<l and demareal,:cl and land reve1111e fixed c,n
land left with transferee;
regulation of the procedure in cllspOlling of claims to he placed in
possession of a holding under section 170;
tbe ro m and manner in which information ~hall be notified
to sub-divisional Officer under sub-section {I) of section
regulation of gt3J1.t or refusal of permiiision to a Bhumiswam.i tor
diversion of his holding or any pat t thereof under ~ection 172;
regulation of relinquishment of rights by a Bhumiswami under
prescription of the terms and conditions on which a person may
be put in possession of an abandoned holding under !'J"Ction 176 (2);
Im. by 1'.f. P. Act 25 of 1964, S, 24 (ii).
Subs. by M. P, Act 24 of I 961, S. I 9(ii), for, "for grant of annuity".
Omitted by M. P. Act 25 of 1964, S. 24 (iii),
♦ Ira. by M. P. Act J,; <lf 1980, S.13.
TitE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
regulation of partition of holdings .md <jrportionment
assessment, under section 178(2); and
guidanctc of Revenue Officers ,vitl1
purchase of right in trees under section
prescriptiou of thC' ruann<::r of seletion ar,d dcnia1catiq 1 cf land
allowed to be restm1c:d. by a Ehumisw,imj tmder se,ti01, W!1 and
thP. fix a tio11 oi loi.d revenue 011 it and frx« tinn d -rcn ( i11 rnp"c t
of Jand left with the occupa11cy ttnant;
pres,npt10n of tl:e rnrumer and the frnni m which amoum of
compensation shall be deposited by an occupancy tl"nant pap.ble
to hi~ Bh u misw ami under se,tion 19 0 ( :i ~ ; .
prescription of time ,vithin which ,1r, applic2.tio1, under sub..
secti1m (I) of section 191 ~bill Le m.:df';]3
the regulation of the procedure in disposing of claims to be placed
in possession of an occupancy holding which has been transferred
prescription of the manntr of selection nnd dernarca(ion of land
vesting in the State Government un<l the fixation of hind revenue
on the land reserved by the Dhumisv,·ami under section 198(4);
the form and the manner ir, wl 1.ich tl1e receipt for n:nt shall be
given under section 199:
the regulation of assestn"ent of increase and reduction m land
rewnue required or permitted under Ch2pter XV;
the regulation of appointrrcnt of Fateh· vnc:er ~cr1icn r22(J), the
manner of distribution of duties of the cflice of ra1d "'1 ere 1J-ere
are two or more pate Is in a village, fix a ticn oi nrr un1cratir n of
a pa tel. and prescription of addition al du ties of p td under sec tj on
224 and his remo\'al from cffce under &ecticn :::c:6 and tLc ap-
pointment of a substitute under section 228;
the regul:ation of the sanitation of viii, gcr, il t 1 \,ri,' ! d 11 c c, H, ;re~
of animals, the protection n:d frncing of wdk t1 r tTJup cf vilfage
roads and I ike matters of villagt" ~df-gcHn.rrcnt fer Yi liq n u t
included within the area of a municipality or a municipal corpor
ation, or a notified aica corrrr.ittee or a Grrm Panchayat;
the .irpointn:ent, pmi,} rr er,i, rnq r-r,1irn ad 6im- i,;r, I cf
tl1 e prescription of the du tics 2 nci n- c<'e cf ~lT O\'i sicn of
(a) the regulation of procedne fer tJ-.e e~t. l lid n rn t cJ .i CH ru
Sabha under section 232,
(h) the manner in Which a Gr~rn faH-a ~hll uc:uire, hc!cl er
transfer property mova.ble t'nd in-n-uv~hJe, _t:'ntf'.r into ccn
tracts, etc., under section 232(4), and
sums to be recovered as fees and otlier inccrr<"~ by a Gram
I. Omitted by M. P. Act 25 af 1964, S. 24, (iii).
3, Ins. bv M P. Act 24 of 1961, S. 19 ( iii).
4. SubJ. by M. P. Act 31 of 1982, S.3.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
(lDii°) prescription of the record to be maintained under scc:tio11 233;
the manner in which the wishes of the ,.;magc1s 6hall be ascertained
(a) regulation of setting apart of U11occupi«I. land for the exetci6e
of nistar , righs under section 23 7 (I) ; and
(h) other purpOsf's for the exercise of nistar ri~lits tll'der section
th c regulation of the giant of perIDjssion for the p fan t;, ti on of fruit
bearing trees and for e:xerci~c of righls under :iecticn 239;
t.he regulation nf the cuuing of trees under ser:tiOI~ 240(1), i'-Dd
of control, managf"ment, felling or removal of the forest growlh
prescription of the manner of proclaiming an order published
under section 241 and regulation of the fr Hing or removal of trees
tl1e rnaJl.r,rr of a5'n:.1 raining and 1en,rding tLe cu~t<-n,.s ;n regard
to matters specified in section 24 2 {I) ; and
(h} the manner of publication of re.cord of custcn,s under section
prescription of the manner of di,pornl of i-:ites in the abadi area
regulation of fishing, catching hunting or ,hcoting of anin,~ 1s in
villages and removal of any materials from land belonging to the
(a) prescription of the form of applicatic11 under
(b) the regulation of the use of water frcm tanks under section
the regulation of pi-cceduie cf 11-e C1·rn- fa Ll;, in caIIing upon
persons residing in the village to perfcrm fal:cur uncn secti<m 252;
pr--scr:ption of standards of cultivr1icr:. n:d rrar<'gcn:er..t under
prescription of conditions for imrecf:cn n:d f?TH-.t of ccpie, of
records, maps and land records under section 256;
generaliy for the guidance of Revenue C:fficcrs .ind all other peJsons
in proceedings under this Code;
any other matter which has to 1:e or may be prescribed.
AU rules made under this section shall be subject to the condition of
All rules made under this Code sha11 be laid on the table of the
Legislative Assembly and shall be subject to ~uch modificatiorn as the Legislative
259. Any reference in any enactment to,-
[( a) A Eh umi swami or a Bh um i dhari in the ?vfahak ash al region;) I
I. Ins. by M. P. Act 24 of 1961, S. 20.
Reference to certain tenurai.
'l'HB MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
. . : ,·
Reftn:na: 10 Jaws not in fora:
holder in the Madhya Bharat rcgion;)Jl
(b) a. pachpan paintalis tenant, pattcdar tenant, grove holder or a
holder of a tank in the Vindhya Pradesh region;
(c) a khatedar tenant or a grove hf,lder in the Sironj region; and
(d) an occupant in the Bhopal region;
shall be deemed to be a refri·ence to a Bhumiswami.
Any reference in this Code to a Central Act which i5 not in
in an} region of the State shall in ·elation to that region be
refcrcn.:e to the corresponding law in force in that region.
Esplanation.--f'or purposes of this sectio11 ,ht, cxpre~!>fon ''Central
Act'' shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 3 (7) of the
Gen~ral Clauses Act. 1897 (X of 1897).
261. The enactments srecified in Schdtk JI :>rr h rd y rqfdr<l to
the extent mentioned in thf' 4th eo1unm thereof;
Provided that tlte repeal shall not affect-
the previous operation of anl la"' so repealw or anytliing
duJy done or sufierc-d thereunder: or
any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued
or incurred under any law so repealed; or
oi- pimishmenl incurred in respect
of any offence committed against any law sO repealed; or
any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in
of ~ny such right,. privilege, obligatio~, liability, penalty;
or pumshment as aforesaid; and any
investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or cmforct"d, and any such pt:-nalty,
or punishment m;:,y hr. imposed as if this Act ~ad not
Providc;d forthcr 1hat subject to d1e prt:i.:.cding proviso, ;uiything
ments and transfers made, noification!;, summom,
proclamations issut.d, authorities and r,ow~rs confcrrrd,
granted, record-of-lights, and other reco~ds framed fl!' confirmed.
red, liahilities incurred and times and plac~ appointed; undtr any such
enactment shall be def'med to bavc been done or taken unt!er
ing provision of this Code and shall continue to be in
and until superseded by anything done or action taken under this Code.
262. (I) Save as otherwise eYpressly provided in this Code, all cases
pending before the State Gov"1"nrnent or anv Revenue Couzt
im~ediately before the coming into force of this Code, whetl1er in
revision, review or otherwi:ie shall be decid<"d in accordan{·1: with the provisions
of the appropriate Jay,, which woulr! l-ave been applicabfo to them had this
Code not been pa!ISCd. ·
Any case pt.nding in Civil Court at the coming into force of
Code, wt:ich would under this Code h<- exdmively
triable by a Revenue
Court, shall be disposed ofby such Civil Court ac-cording to the law
prior to_ the commencement of this Code.
l; R.e-numbued, by M', P. Act. 2♦ or 1961. S.20,
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
All proceddings under any of the laws described in Schedule
Government immediately before the commence--
mcnt of this Code shall, on such commencement,
stand transferred to the
Board and sliall thereupon be disposed of by the Board as if they were pro-
ceedin'gs entertained by the Board under this Code.
ExpJanation.-F01 the purpose of this sub-section "State Government"
shall include the Governor, Council of!y(inisters or a Minister.
(I) If any difficulty arises in giving effect in any region to the
l'owCl' to rem.O'l'e difficulties.
provisions of this Code, the State Government may, by order notified in the
Gazette, make such provisions or give such directions as appear to it to be
necessary for the removal of the difficulty.
A copy of tht- order passed undc~ sub-section (1) sha11 as soon as
may be after it is passed be laid before the Legislative Assembly.
264. Nothing contained in this Code shall apply to a person who holds
Code not to apply in certain
land from the Central Government.
RULES OF PROCEDURE OF REVENUE OFFICERS AND REVENUE
Every surumom shall be in writing, iP. duplicate and shall he signed
and sealed by the Officer issuing it or by smh renon as he empowers in his
behalf, and it shall specify the time and pla,c at which the person summoned
is required to attend, and also whether he is required to give
2. Every summons to a party shall he accon1panied by a concise ~tate-
mcnt about the subject-matter of the proceedings.
A summons to produce documents may be for the production of
certain ~pecified documcr::ts or for the producti0n of ,:ill docun:cr.t~ of a certain
description. in thf" possession or power of the person ,unimoned.
MODE OF SERV1CE OF SUMMONS
4. Every summons shall be served by tendering or delivering a copy
of it to the person summoned personally or to his recognis.-d agent.
Where the person .,ummoned cannot be found and has no recognised
agent, ~ervicc- may be rnaclc on any adult male member of the family of the
person summoned, who is residing with him.
&planation.- A scrvan1 is not a meml,er of the family within thr-
meaning of this rule.
6. Where the se-rving officer ddiveTs or t<tm:!ns a copy of the ~ummons
to th_e person summoHed pt>n;onally or to his recognised agent or other person
on his behalf, he shall require the signature of the pe--rwn, to ~hflm the copy
delivered or tendered to an acknowled<>mcnt of service
7. ]f ,;ervice of the ~umntons cannot be effected in the manner pro\idetl
;., ~ .. 1 .. 0 4, 5 and 6. a con,, t},,...,.nr ~h0'.!!d ½~ ~f"f.i..--::ed :i.t th~ h-.~t known pl.ace
;;j, ;;;dence of the perso; ·,umrnoned or at some place of public resort in such
nm MAOHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 1959
~Vhere a copy of the su:rnmons is aff:xcd as provided m rule 7, the
serving officer shall return the ori0inal cony
't·_rr ~ ci> < tc tl- . ('
l - l -
ro~1 \\' nc 1 lt wa, 1ss11ed with a
report '."nclor,:ed 1Lerco11 or ann - d th -
statmg th- t l
l · - aff· - l 1
l,i.s, 1xec t 1e ,opy, the cirrums1anccs under \\hid1 lie did so
a,m the narne an{~ tre ··ddrcP- -1' 1}
H: per~on 1n \,· J:>f presence
t e copy ·was
,1ffi..xoc,d <1nd where tht· cop,, 1, -clJJ 1xcd
ast J<J10i\JJ p ;ice o
the µerson :ummoned tht report shall al.,o cnntain the nJme and address of
the person, if any, by whom the house was identified.
If the person smnmoned rfsidcs in
may be sent by post to the C01lector of SHch distric-1 for service.
MODE OF COMPLIANCE WITH SUMMONS
Subject to the pi'O\isions of th<' Codt: whcicn:r
appear before a Revenue OJJiccr tr, give evidence shall attend at the time
and place named in the summons for tliat purp<:s<', and , 1 hoevcr is summoned
to produce a document, shall either attend to produce it, or cause it to be
produced, at snch time and place.
MODE OF SERVING NOTICE
I I. Every notice shall he scffed by tendering or delivering a coPY of
It to the person concerned personally or to his recognised agent :
Provided that, ·where the recognised ager. t of tlie pe-rson
a ple;1.der, the notice may be served by ic;1ving a copy thereof at his office or at
the place of his oridinary residence, and such service shall be deemed to be
as effectual as service on the recognised agent per~oually.
vVhere the person conccrm:d cam101 be found and has no recogni-
sed agent, service may be made on any adult male member of the family of
the person concerned, who is residing ·with him.
Explanation.-A servant is not a member of the family within the
meaning of this rule.
Where the S<:Tving officer delivers or tenders a copy of the notic_e
con,:,erne-d personally or to an agent or
Gther person _0 n h~s
behalf, be shall n~4uire the signature of the person, to ,..-horn the copy is . dd1-
ven"d or tendered to an acknowledgment of snvice endorsed on the orign,,d
14. If service of the notice cannot be effected in the mlt11ner provided
in rules 11, 12 and 13 a copy thereof may be ,iffixed at the la,r, known _Place
of residence of the person concerntd or at some
of public resort in :he
village in which the land to which t11e noii.cc relates is :;ituatc or from ,vl11ch
the land is culliv.atcd.
Where .a copy of the notice is affi.,cd as provided in rule 14, the
serving officer shall return the origir,~d copy of the notice
issued it, with a report endor~cd thcrecn or annc-xed thneto stating that he ha:,
so affixed the copy,, t~e circumst.am:es under which he did _so,
address of the pcTson in whose presence th<- copy w,i~
~ffn,ed and v-.1,ierc t c
copy is affixed at the last known place 0f residence of the person not1ce<l, the
report shaU also contain the name and addi·c~~ of the person by
16. If the person to whom 8. notice is tc> be served resides in another
<li~trict, the noticf" may he 1'("llt hy pnst to the Collector· of sudt district for
_MODE OF ISSUING PROCLAMATIONS
Whenever a proc!Bmation is imted under this Code; C'Opies then-of
!lh;,.ll be posted on the notice board of the office of the Revenue Officer issuing-
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
it, at the head quarters of the tahsil within which the land to which it refers
is situate, and at some place of public resort on or adjacent to the land to wliich
it refers, and unless the officer i5suing it othe1wise directs,
shall be further published by beat of drwn on or near the land to which it
Every original order p;,~scd by 8. Revenue Ofiico:>r in any proceed-
ings shall contain a concise statement of the cast:, the point~ for decision, the
de-dsion thereon and the reasons for mcl1 decision.
19. Attachment of movable property other tha'l agricultural produce
in possession of defaulter-(\) ,vlerc theprOpt:rty to be attachtd is movable
property other than cgricultu1rd produce, in the possession of t}e dr.faulter,
tht' attachment shall be made by a,~tual _seizure, and tile attaching officer shall
keep the property in his own custody or in the custody of any of bis sub-ordi-
nates and shall b.- responsible for the due custody tl:ereof :
P10vided that, when the property seized is subject to speedy and natural
decay or when the expense ofkceping .it ;n custody is likely to exceed its value,
the attad.ing officer may sell it at once :
Provided further that when the property attached consists of live-stock,
agricultural implements or other articles which carn1ot be
moved, and the attaching officer does not act under the first proviso to this
rule, he may at the instance of the defaulter or any person claiming to be in-
terested in such ptoperty, leave it in the vill.igc or at the place where it has
(a) in the charge of the defaulter, or of the station pound-keeper, if any;
in the charge of the person claiming to be interc~led in such pro-
perty or of such respectable person as will under-take to keep such
property, on his entering into a bond with one or more
in an amount not less than the value of the property,
will take propc-r care of such
property and produce it when
The attaching officer ~hall make a list of the praperty
and shall obtain thereto the acknowledgment of the person in whose custody
the pro1-crty is left, and, if possible, of the defaulter and of at least one respecta-
ble pcnon in attestation of the correctness of the list. If the property attached
includes both live-stock and other articles a separate list of the live-stock
similarly he prepared and atte,ted.
Where the praperty to be attached
attachment ~hall b~ made by affixing a copy of
where such produce is a growing crop, on the land on which
such crop has grown; ot
where such produce -has been cut or gathered, on the
threshing-floor or place for treading out grain or the like or
fodder-stack on or in which it is deposited;
~nd ,\Jiother cOf.,\· on the outer door or on some other conspicuous part of the
hous,· in which the defaulter ordinarilv resicks or if there is no such house,
ou the outer door or on some other c:onspicuous part of t1,c house in
he carries on business or personally works for gain or in which he is knu\.\"U to
have last re~iderl or carried on businr>5s or personally worked for gain; and
the produce ~hall thereupo!l be deemed to have passeq into the possession of
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
(2) _The attaching officer shall make such arrangements for the custody
of the agncultwal produce as he may conside1r
sufficient ,rnd also to tend,
c;1t, gather and store the produce ar.d do any other act necessary for matu-
ring or preserving it.
(3) The costs incur ed under sub-rule (2) shall be borne by the defaulter.
Where the live-.,tock attaclied is not kft jn the charge of the
defaulter, the expenses for feeding and watering it shall be charged at
rate as the Collector may, by general or special order, fix.
Where thc> property attached is movable property other than
agricultural produce or live~stoC'k, and is not left in the charge of tlie
defaulter, the expcnditun for its safe custody shall be £'h2rged at such rate as the
Cbflector may, by general or special order, fix,
The costs incurred under sub-rules (1) and (2) shall be first
charge on the saJc-procecds of the property.
22. The provisions of O.dcr XXI, Rules 46 to 53 of the Code ofCivil
Procedure, l90B(V of 1908) reg:urding the attadin~ent of tltt: several das,..es of
movable property dealt with in those rules shall, as far as may be, apply to the
attachement made under this Code.
propety :s immov?.be, the atlachemcnt shall be
made by an order prohibiting tl1e dcfaul!er from transferring or charsging the
property in any way, and all persons from taking any benefit from such transfer
(2) The order shall be proclaimed at some place on or ndjecent to such
property by beat of drum or other customary mode, and a copy of the order
sh all be affiixed oi1 a conspicious part of the· property and then on the notice
board of the office of the Revenue Officer.
(3). The order 8hall take effect as against purchasers for value in good
fai:th from the date when a copy of the order is affixed on the property and
against all other transferees from the defaulter from the date on which such
If any daim is set up by a third person to the property atta~,ed
or proceeded against under the provisions of this Code, the Revenue Officer
shall enquire int() the claim and mav admit or rt>ject. it.
The person against whom an order is made un<1cr sub-rule (1) ~ay,
within one year from the date of tlH~ order, institute a suit to establish th~ rJgbt
which he claims to tht' property attached or proce('dc<l against; but subject to
tl1< result of such suit, if any, tLe order shall be conclusive.
Every ~ale shall be conducted by an officer or other person _appoi~ted
by a general or special order in this behalf and shall be made by pubhc auction.
(I) The Revenue Officer shall came a proclamation of the _ill.tended
sale to be made statiug the time and place of sale and specifying as fairly and
(a) thl:' property to be sold;
{h) the land revenue a~sesse-d upon the
property to be sold is an inteTest in land paying ~venue
the recovery of which the s~ is
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE. 19S9
every other thing whi,h the Rcvc-nuc Otfinr consider~
material for a purchaser to know in order to judge of the
,,atme and the value of the pr0pnty.
A copy of the proclamation issued unde1 sub-rule (l) where it relates
to the sale of any holding shall be sent to the Co-openitivc Bank and t_he . Land
Mortgage Bank aperating within that area in whi(·h the holding
The Revenue Officer may, if he consider, this ucccs::iary, summo11
the defaulter and examine him with respect to any matters to be ir,cluded in the
Save ill the case of property of the kind descriLecl in the fim provisu to
rule 19, no sale hereunder shall, without the- c-onsent in writing of the defaulter,
(,) on Sunday or on any authorised civil court holiday or on
any day declared as a local holiday for the area in which
the sale is to be held; and
(ii) until after the expiration of at least thirty days from the
date on which the proclamation thereof v. as made.
The Revenue Officer may, in his discretion, adjourn any sale
hereunder to a s~ified day and hour and the officer conducting any' such sale
may, in his discretion, adjourn tho.; sale recording his n:asons for such adjourn-
Provided that where the order of the Revenue Officer can be obtamed in
time, no such adjournment shall be made without sucli. order.
Where a sale is adjourned under sub-rule (I) for a longt:"r period than
fifteen days, a fresh proclamation shall be made wiless the defaulter consents
Every '>3.le sPall be stopped if, before the lol is knocked down, the
amount due and cost~ are tendered to the officer r;,,nducting the, ale, or proof
is given to his satisfaction that the amount of such d11h ;md costs h~ve heen paid
to the Revenue Officer who ordered the sale.
Any deficiency of price which may happt'n on a resale
of the purchaser's default shall be recoverable from the defaulting purchaser as
if it were an arrear of land revenue,
No officer or othn pt"rson having any duty to perform in
sale shall, either directly or indirecty, bid for, acquire
any interest in the property sold.
SALE OF MOVABLE PROPERTY
property to be sold is agricultural produce, the
(a) if such produce is a growing crop, on or near the land on
which such crop has grown; or
(b) if such produce has been cut or gathered, at or
threshing floor or place for treading out grain or
or fodder stack i
Provided that the Revenue Officer may direct the sale to be held at the
nearest place of public re.,ort, if he is of opinion that the produce
likely to sell to greater advantage.
mE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Where, on the produce. being put up for sale---·
(a) a fair price, in the estimation of the- person holding the sale,
is not offered for it; and
(b) the owner of the-produce 01- a person authorised to act. in
his behalf applies to h_ave the sale postponed till the nex_t
day or, if a market is held at the place of sale, the next
The salo sha U be postp~ned accordingly end shall be then completed,
whatever price may be ~ffered for the produce.
(I) Where the property to be sold 1s a gr.owing crop .a1-.d . the crop
from it_s 11ature a~mits of b<-ing stoJTd but has n:ot yet b~n stored, _the day of the
sale shall he so fixed as to admit of its being made ready for suirmg before the
arrival of such day, and the sale shall not be held until the crop has °bet"n cut or
gathered and is ready for storjng.
. · · {2)
Where the crop from.its nature does not admit of being stored, or
where it appears to the Revenue Officer that the crop can be sold to greater
advantage in an unripe state, it may be sold before it is cut and gat~-ered, and
the purchaser shall be ent;tled to enter on the land ~d to .. do all that 1s necessary
for the purpose of tending and cutting or gathering it.
Where movable property is sold by public auction, the price
ofeach lot shall be paid_ ~t the time of sale er as soon after as the officer or other
person holding ttie sale directs, and in default of payment· th~ property shall
On payment of the purchase money, the officer or other person
holding the sale shall grant a receipt for the same, and the sale shall bebome
(3'. Where the movable property·to be sold is a share in goods be~onginp:
to the defaultet· and a co-owntt, and two or more persons, of whom one 1s nRh
co--owner, respectively hid the same sum for such property or for any Jot, the
bidding shall be deemed to be the bidding of the co-owner.
· 35. No irrt:8Ularity
movable property sh11ll vit;ate the sale; but any person sustaining any injury
by reason of such irregularity at the band of any othtr penC'n ir.iy institute
a suit against him for compensation or (if such other person is the purd::a~n) for·
the. recovery of the specific property and for cornpensatiov in de-fault of such
(I) Where the property soid is movable prope1 ty of which actual
sefaau c has br-en : made, it shall ht- delive1 ed to the -purchaser.
(2) In the case of any other movable property,
may make an order vesting such property in the purchaser 01 as he may
direct; and mch property shall vest acrordingly.
SALE OF IMMOVABl-E PROPERTY
:n. On every sale of immovable praperty the pnson dc:dntd to be
the purchaser shall pay immediately after such declaration a deposit of twenty-
five per cent on the amount of his purchase m~ney to the officer or other
persbn conducting the sale, and ir default of such deposit, the
. 38. The full amount of purchase money payable shaJJ ·be paid by the
purdiaser within .fifteen days from the date of the sale of the property.
Jn dt'fault of payment within the period mf"ntioned in rtde 38,
the deposit may, if the Revl"nue Office1 thinks fit after deftaying. the e'll"penses,
of the sale, be forfeited to the Govcrrinient, and·
and' the defau!ting purchaseT shall 'forfeit all cJa,ims to the property ·or to
any part of the sum fot which it may subseqUC"ntly be sold.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1969
(I) -Where immovable pwperty has Ler:11
sold under d>is Code,
any person, either owning such property or holding an
virtue ofa title acqulled before such sale may, at a"'.ly time within
da~s from the date of sale, apply, to the Revenue Officer to have the sale
set aside on his depositing-
(a) for payment to the pur,:haser, a sum equal to five
percent of the purchase money;
(b) for payment on account of the c1rrear, the amount
specified in the proclamation of sale as that fer the
the sale was ordered
have 13een paid since the date
of the sale on th;
Tf i;uch deposit is made within thi1 ty days from the date of the
aale the Revenue Officer shall pass an order setting aside tl:e sale
Provided that, ifa person applies under rule 41 to have such sale set
a~de, he shall not be entitled to make an application under this rule.
41. At any time within thirty days from the date of sale,
whose interests are affected by such sale may apply to the Revenue Officer
to set aside the sale on the ground of some material irregularity or mistake
in publishing or conducting it, and the Revenue Officer may, after giving
notice to the persons aflCcted thereby, pass an order setting aside the sale
and may order resale; but no sale shall be se-t aside on such grouhds unless
the applicant proves to tlie satisfaction of thf' Revenuf" Officer that he has
sustained substantial injury by such irregularity or mistake.
Except in a case where land has been sold for an ears, which
form a charge on the lar:td, the purchaser may, at
days from the date of sale, apply to the Revenue Officer to
that the defaulter f.,ad no saleable interestin the propenY
sold and Lhe Revenue Officer shall, after due inquiry, pass such orders on
such_ application as he deem~ fit,
N.-. resale under rule 41 sh::ill be made until a
has been published as laid down in rule 26.
44. On the expiry of thirty days frcm the date of sale, 1f no application
has been made under rule 40, 41 or 42 or if such application has been made
and rejectM, ,he Revenue Officer shall pass an order confirming the sale :
Pr0vided that, ,f the Collector has reason to think
to be set as:.de----
notwithstanding that no such application has been made; or
on grounds other than those alleged in any
which has been made and rejected; or
notwithstanding that a period of thirty 'days from the
date of sale has expired;
he may, aftet recording his reasons in writing,
set aside the sale at
before making an order confirm:ng the sale.
Ifnoapplication under rule 41 is made within the t:rnf' allo-
wed therefor, aU daims on the grounds of. irregu1arity or mistake shall be
Nothing in !lllh-rule (I) shall bar the institution of a suit in tht-
Ctivil Court to stt aside a sale on the grOund of fraud or on the ground that
the arrear for which tf.e property is sold is h(?t due or on ti'e ground that
the defau1ter h.,d no saleable interest in the property sold.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVf.NUE CODE, 1959
46. If the sale of any property is set aside
under rulr, 40, ,f I ,42, or 44
the amrnmt of purchase money deposited by the purchaser shall be refunded
CERTIFICATE OF PURCHASE AND DELIVERY OF POSSESSION
47. If the sale of any immovable prorerty has been
Rcv.enue Officer shall grant a certificate to the purchaser
on which the !tale is confirmed, the property sold, and the name of
chaser and shall put the purc~aser in possession of such prnperty,
(I) Where the purchaser is resisted or obstructed by any person
in obtaining possession of the property, he may make an
Revenue Officer complaining of such resistance or obstruction.
(2) The Revenue Officer shall fix a date for investigating the mattet
and shall summon the party against whom the applka tion is made
and answer the same.
49. Where the Revenue Officer is satisfied
by the defaulter or some other person at his instigation; or
by any person in the case of a purchase of land sold for
am..ars of land revenue due in respect thereof;
he shall direct that the purd1ase-1· be put into passession of the praperty.
50. Where in any case to which rule 49 does not apply, the Revenue
Officer is satisfied that the resistanc;e or obstructio11
wa~ camcd by any
claiming in good faith to be in possession of the property on his
or on account ohome person other than the defaulter.
shall make an order dismissing the applic:>tion.
5L (I) Where any peuon other than tlie defaulter i~
immovable property by the purchaser of !>uch property, he may make an
application to the Revenue Officer i.;omplaining of such <lispos~essior;.
(2) The Revemre Officer !!.hall fix a date for in\'!.'stigatin~ we m11tter
and shaJl summon the purrhascr to appear and answer the ~ame.
52. Where the R~vcnue Officer is ~atisfod that t11e applicant was in
possession of the prapctty on his own at·count, or on account of !Orne person
other than the defaulter, he shall direct that th<" applirant be
ssion of the praperty.
' 53. Any party not being a defauitci· against whom
under rule 49, 50 or 52 may institute a suit to establi~r, the right which he.
claims to the present p<>ssrssion of the prnpt-rty but suhject to the result of
such suit, if any, th(" order shall be condusive.
COMMISSIONS TO EXAMINE WITNESSES
54. Any Re-venue Officer may in · any pr~ef"edings is.sue a commission
for the. examination on interrogatories or
otherwise of any penon ·who ii
exempted f:rom attending the court or who is from sickness or. infirmitr
An order. for the issue of a commission for the exa111:inatlon of a
witness may be made by the Revenue Officr;:.r either ofhis own motion or on the
application, supported by affidavit or otherwise, of any pa.:rty tfil the pro-
ceedings or of the witnesll to be examined.
Tl;iE MADIIX A PRADESll LAND REVENUE CQD:t', l!m'
,\uy Revenue Off.cer may, in any proceedings, issue a coml:nissi1111
for die examination of. __
(a:S ,my person resident Jx;yOJ:(l the LJcd limib of his jurisdic,tion;
;tny person who U, about to lt..1.vc such limits before the date' ~i'1
which he is required to be examined in c.ourt;
/,: ,my pcr~OJ in the bcnicl' oftht Ccrural orthc.:SLateGO\t:rnnic),1
who c<mJlot, iu Lilt' opinioJi uf s1.;d1 Rt:venue Officer, attend
without detriment to the puhlic sr,rvi.;r.:.
A commission for tht: examin,11il'll o[ a
to .iny person whom the Court thillks fit to exerutc it, or ,o any
Officer who can conveniently examine such per~on.
Every Revenue Officer receiving a commis.~on for
of any person shall examine him or cau~ him to be ex,imincd pursuant
The Revenue Officer o~ issuing any commission undrr this rule sh.di
direct whether the comrn1ssion ~hall be returned to hirnsdf or to
\'\'hen:: a commission ha~ been duly execuled, ! t i;hall
together ,...-ith the evidence taken under it, to the Revcuue Officer by whom it
was issued, unless the order for issuiug the commission has
in which casi.: th· commission >11al! be r"tnrncd in t:rn:s of such 0rder;
commis,i-m and die rctur11 i,J,cieto aad tb,: cvidtme
(subject to lle provisicns of the next followmg rule) form pait of
Evi(k-rce takci1 llndcr a commis,inJ1 c:ball not be
in the proceeding without cumcnt of the party ag.:iinst whom the sa.rnt
the person who gave the evidence is beyond tlie jurisdiction' of
t.he court, or dc'ad or unable
from sickness or infirmity
attend to be persona'lly ex,tmined, or exempted from personal
appearanc,,. in Coul't, or is a per~nu in the service of the Central
or the S1atc Govc-rnr>1t"'l_l who c2cnnot, in
d1fc' opinion of the
Rt:venue OfJic:er . .ittend wi1hout ch:te,:irrent to the publtf
the Revenue Officer in his
proof of any of the circumstarccs mentioned in clause (a) and
authorises the evidence of :1ny pcrsoc lwing read as evidence ,in
th!· proceedings, notwithstanding prooftkH the came fort,iki.nR
s1wl1 evid,- ,ce- ],y r:.nrnmission 1':1.s ,·c,~·,d [!t thi· time ofrr..odill1,I
Br:fore issuing any comnnssion
Officer may ()rder such ~um (if any) as he thinks rert~om.ble for the
of the commi~sion tn be, within a time to be fixec!. p· id hy the party at
in,ta 1cc or for whose benefit the commis~io:1 is issued.
of this Code relntiug to the
atten.d.ancc and examl-'lation of ,vitnesses. and to the remuneration
pen:,Jties to be irnp0sed npon witnes~es, -~hall apply to person, required to, :give
evidcil''C or tn produce dociments nnrlct· tlwse rllle-s
this rule the Commi~~ioi1cr ,hall be <l<'cmed to he a R~vcnuc Court.
'\ Comm's~ion,,.r P1.oy ;ip;'lY to :;ry R(,· .. ·n1w
Officr;,· within a,f' local
limits of who,, j, 1~i,'1ictio-, 1 -.vitr:e~s re,icl,~s frir tlw i~~'t"' of ?.'l'y nroce~
may fiq(\ it 'lf'!CC~nrv to issl!e to, or agai,1~t. rnrh ,vitne~.
Officf!f may, in hi~ (tiscretio1, isme such :~roer-.~s as he r.on~idcrs reasonable· and
mB MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVENUE CODE, 1959
Where a commission is ill.Sued under the1f n1Ies, the Revenue
OHicer shaH direct that the parties to the proceedings siiall appear before the
C:ommiSBioncr in person or by thc.ir agents or p1rnders.
Where all or any of the parfes do not ~o appe:ir, the ComrruS!ioncr
may. proceed in thejr absence.
PROCE!-,DING BY, OR AGAINST Mli\'ORS AI\D PERSOKS OF
Every application by a minor shall be filed iu his name by a per.son
acting as the guardian of the minor.
Whe1·e the non-applicaut is a minor the Revcnut. Officer, on being
~ati~fied of the fact ufhis rninority, ~hall appuini a proper person to
gua i dia n nf such min or for the purpose of the proceedi.r1 gs.
Any person \\ho is ofs01u1d mind and has attained
whose inter e~ t is not a dvcrsc t<J that nf the min or uia y ~ct as guardian
minor party iu the proceedings.
In rlic case ',·:here ,1 nOrt-appiicant is a
~tppointed has HO fund.~ !O meet th..: 111:ccssary cxpt';Ises, the
may direct the appliranl to deposit a sufficient sum for the
c:nsts so incurred by the applicant shall be adjrn;ted in
, final order passed ia respect of tht> costs.
No guardian shall, without the l('ave of the Revenuf'.
·expresi,ly recorded in the proc.reding~, ?ntcr into any agreement
on behalf ofa minor with reference
to the prorecdings in which he ach a~ his
Any such agreement or comp1omiseemercd into without
of the Revenue Officer so recorded, shall be voidable
against all parties other
The provisions contained iu mies 63 to 67, shall apply mttatis mut.amdis
. to.- pcuons of w1sound mind,
.. ,...,.__, ..,._ - - - -- ~ ---- ~----- ....... - ---- ------ --- -~ --- -... -·----
The Cenral Provinces an<l lkrar Hindu Women's The ,1·hoio
Rights to Property (Exten!<ion to Ag·ricuhural
Tiu.:; Madhya Pradesh Liand Revenue Code, 1954.
Tl1el\Iadhya Pradesh Creation of Commfasioncn-
Indore Land Revenue and Tenancy Art, 1931.
Barwani State Resolution No, 67.
Indore Restitution of Pa ltc~lar Teiw.nt\ Mott-
ga.gt"cd Land Act, 1941 .
Dhru- LiLnd Rcvenm: ruid Ten,uLcv Act, 1941-42
Qabil Kast Gwalior, Samv: 1 t 1983,
1facUiya Bh,lral Jagir Land Record~ ~fanage-
ment Act. Snmvat 20()6.
THE MADHYA PRADESH LAND REVBNUE mDE.-199
!\.ladlrya BharatJagii Tciunlis Rc:-sturalion , f
Land Act, Samvat 2006.
lvladhya Bh.ir:n Land Rt,venue and Tenai,<.·-}
Madhya Bharat J!i.1uafi and Jnam Tr.n2ul~ and
Sub-tenants Protection Act, 1954.
Madhya. Bharat Ryotwari Suh-le~l:C Protection
The Rcwa Slate Prc-ernptior> Act, 1946.
Vindhya Pradesh Land Revr.nnc and Tf'..nancy
The Bliopal State Land Rc1.·cnuc Act, 1932.
The Bhopal State SubTt'n,mts Prott·<tior Act,
The Hhopal State Sub-Tenaut" (ol Occupant~)
The Rajasthan Revenue Cm:1'1:; (l'r(lct:dure and
The R,tia~th~m Pnhlic Dem;;nd~ Recovcrv An,
The Rajasthan Land~ Slmm1ary SettJernrnt Act,
Th!' Rajasthan Rent Rates Determination and
The Rajasthau Holding~ (Consolidation and
Prevention of Fia~c-ntation) Act, J!)M.
The Raja!lthan Colonisation Act, 1954.
The Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955.
The Raja.uhan Land Revenue Act, J!J56.
The Rajasthan Review and Validation flf Rent
Rates (Revival) Act, 1956.
[Stt uctitm 262 (3)1
(l) The lndore Land Re.:enue and Tt-nancy Act.
(3) Qawaid Jagiidaran, Gwalior.
Qawaid Mnafidnran Jauzwe Arazi Riya~at~ O,.villior.
(5) Jagir and htuafi Rules of the Rajgarh Statl'.
Dhar Land R,~vcnue Act.
Muafi Rule~ ofthe Dh:i.r St,Hc
Inam R11les of the Dcwa~ (Scnioi,:,.
Land Revenue nnd Tenancy Act of De,vas (Junior).
tfoafi Rules of Dewas (Junior).
Qa.,vaid Mua fi Rules of the Jh abna State.
Nnzrana Rule~ of the BRrw;i.ni State,
\ ··~ 1l1R ~ ~
~. 2-22-~filit'lli) "lfiirU38 fu. '#.
*· \A cfi I WI ct
W'l:i 3TI\ fqi:Wft ~
tj :it]~ l1, ~
0i\ fllHf, ~- ,/
7017/2l-a:l'fSITTi'Cl1Jf/2002.-0filt11ii} fmTRlf'q]' <nT f11-1fr:·tf€id art'~, "furn in:~ 3-11-2002 <til {1""14ict
<'fi1 W1cfi"JU ~ ~ ~
0-i~lflll~ ~ {l-441fl ~
';fJlJ ~ n'lf! 3ll~::'illj6R,
um 2 ( 1 )( ll"-1 )1"
. ffct1«11G ~, ~
~ s3~ q-q if m1h-P1~ fu'QR-~ r;m f.1;;ifo1forn ffl if~~
an'iffi,q-q qi] mimi ~
~ffi+III~ 1i:-~~ (lrnl~) :m'~ (_Ri.311-r-l
m11l1 11~ "l-~~. -1959 ( ~
1959) -;,a~~~ affeffirq-q~-.rrqit ~
% q;r tm:J-2 otft"3"tlmu ( 1 ) "%;- ~
(.:t-1 ) if ,;ffe@ ( "IDn) ~~q__ f.1~f4 f3Rf: ~
.sl4I f9 I $H-I .....,i-i {1~1"""'14'1""=I7"$ffi'~i'i
311{ ¢t I Ull I
c ~) _ _
1-fR .m'm°"iflilf q;r mu 239 ~ ffl 1<·ft-.fr.n "~ 'lfird --Ifii if iwrn ~
if w 1f>"c--RR ~a.ri 31n 3A <iii.if~ 3{f~" ~
mu 239 <fit~ ( 1) 3iR: c 2) if ~i:fuo ~*~''
um 239 cti" <JllURt
l[{1" olfqf.:i,;rq <nl" m"U 239 cf>1 "3"qqr{I ( 5) "t ~ct. f1~fe1forn -:rqqro 3Ri: ~
( 5 ) ;}.- ~
cf{ m~ 3TI"TI-::p;fl-!, 19so < 19so qi]~ 69) -t ~'Q
~ffi'R W%° ~ ffl 1R ~am)"qur ml <nll{ f➔~lf<ct ~
W. ~- q){f{ ~~<IT
"9--.: <f1TI om~~ w 'i~- .
1FJ~<f,1' lTIU 241 <ti1"~tf!U (4-) Ti~"~~m"~'f'2l"R"TT"~
1if1 ~cfft mtr 241 cfft~ (s) it 3tni'i"f..1i;iR1f,:m1 ~
cr,[~t[<fiffi aj ft:mml ~
1017121-a,~2002. -'i.fml ~ ~
348 ~ "&"Us (3) ~~ii" £§s11f1114 ir_-m zjfum
0ili fl' I~ ~ ~
~ 1l11 it (1¥Jl 311~W:!f!H,
CHHA TIISGARH ADHINJY AM
(No. 31 of 2002)
CHHA TTISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE (AMENDMENT) ADHINIY AM, 2002
An A<:t to amend the Chhattisgarh and Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 2o of 1959).
Be it enacted by the Chhattisgarh Legislalure in the 53rd Year of the republic oflndia as
This Ad.hi11iyam may be called the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue code (Amend-
It shall come into force from the date of its publication in the Gazette.
After entry (vii) of clause (Z-l) of Sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Chhatti5garh Land
Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of 1959), (Herc in after referred as the Principal Act) the
entries shalt"be inserted, namely :-
Short title and Com-
J nsertion in sectinn 2
In Section 239 of the Principal Act. for the previous marginal he;:,ding "rights in
fruit bearing trees p]anted in unoccupjed land'' the marginal heading "rights in
fruit bearing trees and other trees planted in unoccupied land and Bhata Land-and
Bade Jhad/Chhote Jhad Ka Jungle" shall be substituted.
In Sub-section (I) and (2) of Section 239 after the words "unoccupied Land"
wherever it occurs the words "and Bhat.a Land and Bade Jhad/Chhote Jhad Ka
Jungle" shall be added.
section (S) lo Section
ui11w1~ m, 'fu:rtcn 3 ~
After Sub-section (5) of Section 239 of the Principal Act, the following Sub-section shall be
Permanent lease for such Bhata Land, on which the provisions of the Forest, Con-
servation Act, 1980 (No. 69 of 1980) shall not apply may be grante.1.
An agreement can be executed for plan ta.ti on on Bade Jhad/Chh ote Jhad Ka Jungle.
No bhumiswami right shall accrue to the agreement holder or of his/her heir of the
Land of Bade Jhad/Chhote Jhad Ka Jungle and on che trees planted on the above
land. The agreemcn t holder or his/her heir shall be entitled to on! y usuftuct of the
In the Sub-section (4) of Section 241 of the Principal Act for the words "One
thousand rupees·· the words ''Five thousand rupees" sh.ill be substituted.
At Che end of Sub-section (5) of Section 241, of the Principal Act, the foJlowing ·
words shall be added, namely :-
"However such person shaJJ be required to get his land demarcated by the
competent authority and to infonn in writing the Revenue Officer and Range Forest
Officer having Jurisdiction a1lcast 10 days before felling of removal of such trees"
"~lfltz % aRPkl ~
flcfie) ~mb ~- J;1tM,
'iIT. 2-22-'i9ifttt11~ IAR"/38 ftl. ~-·
2003--4ffil 19, ff 1925
if,wict't, ·~ cfi@UOI ft:it;" 'tiH, ~
lNI  HJ..f@R!id aNf.t:qq Fim -q'{ ~
3-5-2003 ifil' (1◄41M ~
@'ifttfltf ,li {19-Nid %° 1'11 ~ c1¥D a:tl(tli:l~U:(,
efflflI~ 'i,-~~. 1959 (sfi. 20lf-{_1939), '11T~~~lifwfflt"~~f.nb:t,
qil' ~-3 ~ ltl'A' 'tR f.:it.Jj!:jt11< s;fott4!fqa ~
11 10 ( 1 )
2002 Tfi1mtffi~ anflfa~ @ ~le114
~. ~1l;li $1f~1q;-, 4i~ ~ir.r tf'-'l at~re·q«f
Sfillfq If~ ~i i:§'ffifl  1q {l"iRq~til Wijffifltr-ft~lil'tihrerr wrr~ felf➔'1iiln 411~.
ll:mr ~, ~arct ~ 31N<-i'1cti-1 * ~
wft v;ci fqf-llliit1 ~ ~-
'tfr,! mt'nr 1fi' atd'fa ~
<til4i:41f~t1i nefl flii41-i:ft11 ~
~7f>'t \l'fU 44 !ti't a-q1:IRJ < 1> %m <e> ii~··~··~%~~~
llm' 44 '# 'ffffllA,
mtffl'"lfit 'efRI 44 ifil'TI':DU (1) %l1Uli (i1) if~~ ~~qifffi
~lift "11U 44 ~~
(2) *l§q (ifR) ~~~"31'P-f.
,,. liftffl 1ffl' \lTU 47 if~ (11) qiJ W'q ~
12. mt'ffi ~ lim 49 ~ ~
( 3) * ~
'q'{ f.:t'-11:1+11( sifl'l+ttlfr,HI rctitn ~ :-
~. -qre;-~ a4:t=iS1m ~-WR*~~ ~tt~ ~
~~~lfQTt, sf!~'R1TI. m~1'i\~111~~~; 111l/ffl'
~ f.rcRt{ iii~ if ~
~.r-1m "fi1 51f~~r~a -m qi(~-"
3.fft'fflctft Jmf so<lft~ ( 1) * ifi'~ (~) i)i~g- (Tf) 'llVliG
~'1'ft 1:mJ SOef.'t~ ( 1) ~.-%1Ji'i'{~) if ~lr-::"~ ~u
ifi't ~ so 1' r otNm ( 2) % litls (en) if~"~ all!fm'11 ~ * ~
~'!fit "lm SO~~ ( 2) t"wa-i ('cfR) -q· 'if~ ~"l~%~
ifi'I' 1.t'T{l so~~ ( 2) % ~(~)if ~w'; ~
14. ~lifft iqm s11f.1 ~
f~) -q~m"~ ~"~.1' ~ ii-m 51 if lml'IR'.
mtm~ Q"RI 114-V:%1,<f ~
"tJ{ ,r:rr i:mcf ~~~II~~
114-~ ifit a-q1-.JJ"U ( 1 ), ( 2) ~
( 3) ~~~~"'I.-~ v_.;r
:~-oi~/03.-s:rr«r t- li~ t- ~
348 ~ l§1l'6 (3) ~ ~
1l mihM4 'l-~ mt"m
2003 (w: 11 lfi.2003) <ffi ~
(No. 11 of 2003)
lft .... ◄itiiQ41, ~-'fflq,
CIUIA 'ITISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2003
An Act to further amend.the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code 19S9 (No, 20 of 1!1S9).
Be it enacted by the Cbhattisgarh Legislature in the fifty-fourth year of the Republic of India
This Act may b:e called the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code (Amendment) Act,
It shall come into force from 23rd November 2002 (Twenty third November Two
Section 3 of the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code 1959 (No. 20 of 1959) (Here in after referred
. as the Code) shall be substituted by the following :-
There shall be a Board of Revenue for Chhattisgarh having a President.
In addition to the President, the State Government may appoint as many memben
as it may deem fit
Section 10 of the Code shall be substituted by the following. :-
All appeals, applications for revision, review and other proceedings under the
Code pending before the Board of Revenue of Madhya Pradesh, relating to the
State of Chhattisgarh on 3 t st October 2002 shall stand transfened to and, be heard
and decided by the Board of Revenue of Cbhatrisgarh.
All appeals, applications for revision, review and other proceedings under the
Code pending as on 23rd November, 2002 before the Commissioners and
Additional Commissioners, shall stand transferred to and, be heard and decided by
the Board of Revenue.
Provided that all bona fide decisions, proceedings and actions taken by
the Commissioners or6e Additional Commissioners appointed under the Code
after the 22nd November, 2002 till they relinquished office, shall be deemed to be
legal and valid .
The following words appearing in Section 11 of the Code shall be omitted :-
Coilllll.issioner (including Additional Commissioners);
S\J.b..section (2) of Section 12 of the Code shall~ omitted.
Section 14 of the Code shall be omitted.
Section 15 of the Code shall be omitted.
Sub-section (2) of Section 29 of the Code shall be omitted.
The words "Commissioner, a "appearing in Sub-section (2) of Se.ction 30 of the code shall be
In clause (e) of Sub--section (1) of Section 44 of the Code, for the word
"Commissioner" the words "Board of Revenue" shall be substituted.
In clause (g) of Sub-section ( 1) of Section 44, of the Code the word "Commi-
ssioner or the" shall be omitted.
In clause (i) of Sub-section (2) of Section 44, of the code for the word "Commi-
ssiqner" the words "Board of Revenue" shall be substituted.
clause (iii) of Sub-section (2) of Section 44 of the code shall be omitted.
11. . Sub-section (b) of Section 4 7 of the Code shall be omitted.
Sub-section (3) of Section 49 of the Code shall be substituted by the following:-
~(3) After hearing the pa1ties, the Appellate Authority may confirm, vary or
rev~rse the order upp~u led ag~1inst; or may take such additional evidence as it may consider
necessary for passing its order.
Provided that the Appellate Authority shall not remand the case for disposal by
any Revenue Officer subordinate to it."
In Sub-section (I}. of Section 50 of the Code the words "or Commissioner"
appearing before the words "or the Settlement Commissionern sh.all be omitted.
In sub-clause ( c) of clause (i) of the proviso to Sub-section ( 1) of Section 50 of the
Code, the words "Commissioner or" appearing before the words "the Settlement
Commissioner" shall be omitted.
In clause (ii) of the proviso to Sub-se.ction ( I )of Section 50 of the Code, the words
neommissioner or" appearing before the words, "the Settlement Commissione,."
In clause (i) of Sub-section (2) of Section 50 of the Code, the words "the Commi-
ssioner or" appearing before the words "the Settlement Commissioner", shall be
In clause (ii) of Sub-section (2) of Section 50 of the Code, the words ;.'the Commi-
ssioner or" appearing before the words "the Settlement Commissioner." shall be
In clause (iii) of Sub-section (2) of Section 50 of'the Code the word "Commi-
ssioner" appearing before the wards, ''Settlement Commissiooer," and the words
"the Commissioner or" appearing before the words the Settlement Commis
sioner" shall be omitted. .
lnclQuse (iv)of Sub--section (2) of Section 50ofthe Code, the words "the Commi-
ssioner or" appearing before the words "the Settlement Commissioner" shall be
In clause (i) of the proviso of Su~section (1) of the Section 51 of the Code the word "Commi~
ssioner" appearing before the words. "Settlement Commissioner" shall be omitted.
In Section 114-Aof theCode, for the marginal beading "Bboo Adhikar Avam.Rin
Pustika'' the new marginal heading "Kuan Kitab" shall be substituted.
In Sub-section (1), (2) and (3) of Section 114-Aof tbe Code. for the words "Bhoo
Adbikar Avam Rin Pustika", wherever it occurs the word "Kisan Kitab,.,sball be
'ffl'. 2-22-@tft-ai14 ~38 ft:1. ll'.
20 ~ 2005-~ 30, ~
q,{"qj0j mt '1-tcR, ~
451S/21~olfiWl11Jl/04.-@ffl'41'14 ftNR ~'Iii f..:iH@f&d ~~ii{~ 11-s-2::IJs ~
,t) .Sll-t$1tl ~ ~
@'filt14H; ~ {l...qqj(1 ~ ~
. (~ 6 ~
~ alf~ ~ ~
@dh.1114 '1,-~ liftffl, {lm\lA) ~t
0ffl@q '1.-~~. 1959 (~201li_1959) (':3ll~~~lttwmt"~ifM!
t) 'ih1' mu 44 1't ~
'q( Ai.oi~f&d o'Q~ ~
31\Wi ll":mt '1111; ~
3T<fm Ti inful ~
off@~ fcRrc tffl1I" ~-
iiH{liii«I ~i:RT1'lmf Nill1Tfl.TI t-<tt i«-<nte~i ~'2fii;
4S15/21-at/JIT{iq1'J/04. -,ma ~n:i~'-IR ~ ~
348 t"~ ( .3) t ~
-q l', T/. '!-~ mtffl (tffll"l1')
~f-ilM, 2005 (iii. 6 lF(,
t- '9l1f ll <f~I &jj~fdlj«.R,
(No. 6 of 2005)
CHHATI'JSGARH LAND REVENUE CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2005
An Act further to amend the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of 1959)
Be it enacted by the Chhattisgarh Legislature in the fifty sixth year of the Republic of India
This Act may be called the ~hhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, (Amendment) Act,
2005 (No. 6 of 2005).
11 sba11 come into force from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
For sub-- section (2) of section 44 of the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of
1959) (hereinafter ref erred to as the Code) the following sub-section shall be substituted,
Save as otherwise provided .1. second appeal shall lie against every_ order passed
iri first appeal under this code or the rules made thereunder :.:....... _
if such order is passed ,.,y the Sub-Divisional Officer:___to the Collector;
if such order is passed by ihe Collector-to the Board;
if such order is passed by the Senlement Officer-to the Settlement
Short tide and com-
After sub-section (2) of section 59 of the code foUowing proviso shali be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that the small industries 6hall be exempted from the re-assessmen! of the land
tlivened not exceeding five acres."
---·-·-- -- ----- .. ---·------·· ·- -. ·--·-- .. -----····
m:ir~, IJ{'l! 'llf(! mlR ,;rrq,;f\, ~
m '!J~r:fl~. -rr,;i-~i-~Ii'-l -:::i :;fl::~1. ~P'IT )!o,-;rfi,r,;r-:,f\C'S.
1'TR:: '.rTiiA {fiAT ~
f"eg) * m ~ ~- ~
'1ft. 2-22-edh-1;1~ Tf\iR:/38 ftr. ~-
"i'l<ti. l 14-/20-1 -03. ''
.: . _: . :-!,?,~ <
is~ 2006-lll'E( s, m 1921
-. --. ~ am~~ fq,nry
ifiefcltul ftiw 'tcR, ~
-~06. u=cfttt'lif fq"ltR' 'a':rr <fi1 ~CiR-lf&d ~-m lft ~
vrati W'TT t, ~
ctft ~t" ft;rtt FfiTiffif m;qf -a:iwrt. .
uJh,Mf 'i~~, 1959" <_ iiii.')o ~
1959) 'iliT 3ttt'~~ l!);-3riaf.:t:q4.
<ri it' efflWI~ n:f1fR ~
~ ~ aifi4 Allf'i1a tr!' :-
9tl('3lkf iJ:-~~, 19~ ~
20 W(._ 1959) iffl" Qm 165 tfij~ (6-&"lt) qj'f ffl~
Ji1Wli731/21-a:f~6--'lRa 4i ijrc.Efc=t ~~348 ~(3) 'q:j ~~
9:tf1t1114 ,i-lmqlfftm (:EMltR) .
200s. cw. s v-t. 2006> qj'J ~ G oaqq_1E1 * ffliliR ll ~
'!Ffilfffl fi5qr 1iffilt t
· g~Qllq ·~ ~
$"~ ~ <f'fT all~lmjtil(,
{No. 8 of 2006)
CBHAtTISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2005 ·
An Act' further to amend the Chhatti.sprb Land Revenue Code; 1959 (No. 20 of 1959).
Be it enacted by the CbhJttisgarh Legislature in the fifty six th year of the republic of India as
Short tWe and Com-
The Act may be called the· Chbanisgarh Land Revenue Code (Amendment)
Act, 2005. . ·
It shall come into force from the date,of its publication in the official Gazette .
Sul,..section (6.-ee) of Section 165 of the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959. (No. 20 of
1959) shall be Omitted.
~. 2-22-@'dl@tt; ~38 ft'. it.
t· w ch I R,n,
2008-'b" 16, ltlli 1930
291s/1H. 113121-atfl:rl.JU. 11.,os.-~ '$' ~
213 t ri'=; iitfte,14 t ~
~i f.:t"lft.1ftsln (~) ~'
01 wt, 2008) atiallll{DI cfil' ~
. iF6'\il1 - ~
ii ':rfq ll' ~
. :(~ 1 lF(.2008)
_ rit1tt ,_-tlatfci tifla, ( .:tilll'f) ana,1~1, 2001 ·
ftl«aif "f;"l.liiRit111ffl, 1959(l&IIPli" 201Fl.1959 )-q;,.: ........ fflQ. 31i41C¥1
lffl: l'Fl'lfi111FJ~-lfitlR~ -tfft alt wiftw14 c -0-.q1M lll,. ~-e)1l1;ff-t
iliRUJ 111311qif4ifi fl "JPlt t ff5 ~
118111filn 1i&"ffl' t :-
ll1 31&.ffli llif 1ffiA -tP1 iil~·· '1-V<lM,1ifnr_(liwtR) 3lUlfflt, 2008
(lRi. 1 lT-l. 2008 )' t. -
u'tilefif 11.-"Qilfil lffm, 1959 .(lfi". 20 -e,. 1959 > (li flA ffik 'WUJ.. l@" atltitf➔4it %
if f.d& t). lift" 'IRl 10 ~ ~
(2) alt ~$1~i'IFPK f1S-1fl!tft1a ~
· YfiH'4it.l fifitrr111N, ~
( 2) . (~)
ij'"ri -sos@ .ii) :-
-ti~ \:11111~ 1' Pcf¾N◄ Plit-~-ti~~ ; -
~.atl'ft1f o(l_11U¥ dll\ii:iii8 l:Rl 'lllftt1-%~
a-ql§q adtAiRt .. w ~
1AV~ lf P4P-l:ti:ii( f!R -rR tu 'ffl\:ffllf ;
1'P16 WRa ~. 3-tflff'M l(li ~
~f4qlfilaf "afr 23 ~
lP111'5191' ff.4f.lfqifl q 'fitim !('1018111 ~

a'lf\lfi!qq-.,. f.llJt -44,ff ;--
· ,;, · -
-. ,: -· (,' , :- -·,
. - ( 1 )
,~ ( 1) tfilN (lr) if lJil; ~~-~
. . ; ' ;, .
~,(1)--lN(lJ)f~ -~~◄.fft~,.-_.,'qffl -~ .. ~_.
~ ~1'f ~441'f~(2)· ~;~·~ f;tJ.t~r.~'s,~tfqaf~
. : ,;: .:·.
:. :. : .. '.:···:·:'~-r'r·,-'.;. ··.,: !!
.. (2) ~a~at-~~lft1no111111~~~~$-_ ·
. -· -·. ':, :;,_._ ,. ''lllfl,tir~.r;.· ·. ->:.
. , .,;.'') :.:< ''-:'.'' .: ','" ;, .~:. ,. : ,' I; , ' ,
(~). . 1R ~.
~ t lfr- .
. . . . ~-~ ..... :-. - ; '.::' . ··; ... _: .. ::
c~)-:_:,::lnt-~  ~_.Jm.~tpff t 'ffl ~
. ·.· , r-...
. ... ::·· ~,.,--: .'
dwif:.-~ apq 1ttJffl if~
-- r.t.:4ifim ~-if~ M ,ff i581m~1'rft, ~Fli' .
. (]{Iii) . 'V fil:. filftl ~t:fttftl 1'it ~
: -ql 1' 1f2fiJ t 'Ill
_- ___ . <lft=I> .-flli lQ m;m111nNtff ~if
"~ ~ · 1 :
. · -~~-1'Jlfl Ii t ~iii;
- . 'U'll!frifi allllR 1R W t' M'iNci if
. ,_a~~ 11m 47 '$ wvg (i.fi)·$ ~f.ti=tmftia ~- At~ fifiqy·~
. "(ti) ~ ~
'Ql!la fc;;t 1fit ~"
~-1'iW ,~ 1fflf IFft;
. ' '~-- ·-·. /,'
QITT so if liffltR.
1fR 3lf~<f>l 1--TTU sooli't~ (1) ~~~~
"&l~dlffi ~ * ~
~ "~ 31~' 3Rf:~ ~
~3'f~efit"Tl'U 50~ ~(1)~. '$ TI-~ (<n)tf ~-
lFf ¢'~~\Tl'U so1.tit.~ (2) t-ai:i-~ (~)if w-=: ·~·~.
1Ff a,f~ 1.fit ~ so 1.fit ~
(2) t-TI-l§lJ'g (~) 'll~ ··iiij~iiH{I
w-=: "~ ~· ar-6:~ ~
rlt "l'JU so 'en1' ~
( 2) ~ "Jtl'-'@tl".s ('ffio\') -q ~-~ ~
a:w~· ofil m 131'1 t ~
~ 3'f~ ctl qm so 1'fr ~
( 2) ~-a-q-~ (~) -q ~
~-~ ~· ar-6:~ fcf;.n ~-
3"1'!:lm ( 1) t-.~
"3"1l-1Jq (~) ~ W-:: ~ * ~
. anti S 1 if lml'lA".
~ "~' a:R'f:~ ~
2915fil'. -3lf1)1f./6. ll./08.-\:Jm'I '$ ~
348 'Sfi"~ (3) "t' ~
2008 (~ 01 tfi,2008) ~arn-;it ~~tw'l:FfiR *~~M
'$ -::tTtf it 'i'l'2fl .,Jj~~ll'j,+11(.
-~ fiiw q;q:,t; 31fumn ~.
--~ lTI'R' ~ ·3Mff@ sTF.
-:ill_ 2-22··sc<J9lw11 lf-if.!!38fI:r. ,t
~- 114-/20-01-0. _ ..
.. :.::·..::..::: .::..:..:-..::.'.:-..... ~-=.=-=-=-================::::::===-:::::::::::==::..-:::;::---::::::---· -
23 3J1m'f 2oos-11m 1, ffi. 1930_
st>. s1sonft. -31/1Jt./iJ. lf./08. et"i\Qi~ 0.,.-tAlNfilir f-1qR-lftiw -~ftR:l'lR~ 14-08-2008 ,.;)
"Vl'8 wt~ t, ~
* -fttf ~ ""'' a:tt{=t111en,.
~ ~~<fil;jf'Sffi'l')'"q 0ffi.fii1 'l-~ ~
~,,..;h,Fl1' "Ii:--~ lffirm, 1959 (i\ii, 20 -;r-i_ 1959 1 (--:if!~~~ tfR ~._fu.::i 't
t), ~ '=ml 10 ~
"3""q'qm ( 2 ) 3m: ~
i::n: f1 CJ f,..,foHi fflJ':1
~ll: 'tl'ITffl't'i, ifi~~t1"CI ~
iirt ~ ~- ~
altfq'f TI :gag a;f~ "ID'U~ 3ffl'$fu.G
ifft* ~~-a: fqf1~i:l4 r~ ~
TI"'l§ll'g a;f~~ tnmf-~ ~
3-if<:lt:111'11 l~ oR Efil4&ift4i ~ 23 ~. 2002 1\"
~-~~tlflilfi) a:mft'ITJ TJ"Q 1) ~11ltt-~'t-if<!.ffi
um 11 ii ltm't.R.
fti1f1ti:ll11 ~ ~ffiffl ~15'UT 1Ffit'lt~ffl~~<~
lfil t~idfU1 ~ fuil" ~-
'>fl' ~fuif&id t)" 3R'I:~ fifill1 ~.
T.i~: ,~ts-#{,fq-;;s\ ~ro 1:.: ~
otrt.W ( 1) ~~~~cf:,;.~ ~:i::a.~ ~
.:;t:ilFi'f if; -~ ?ii ~
-;m .Ji (S,ti<>r, O!".(I_'\ lfl ~
l~'t'!I \tf :H{f.l '1£1!+-!\1 -;m <i'f ~
3i".rR ~-~~~lit m it~ lm ~ 3l'ttt~fGa-~f!.,.ff
~,~1;. ~~ifi ~mstr. ~
m-enr4 lffq ~4i!l '3f!
~fif."m ~ a:n"1i!f+1.1fl-lfn .i;m <ii~ ~iir-f rr:ti- ~n: ~
~➔ l.(l::r,\<, fdi 'ti::'f. ';f\:!171 'm cJ attta:T m
';t 3,N<fi ~·-wrf -q ~ ~
~-~. J~t~ 7.,,-.ri F-~ ~:, r-~~ ::ii-~~ ~.n·~;ni7-~ ··1.-:-! r=: A~:.!4;~ 7r
r=.t . :1 ~~---:. ~"&~~ ~-
~.11 ~ :'~I 11m ~
·1.-r i ;:~ -:r;q ~.rn *-"
"TT ;::=r~,..r f.;.=Jf?l~ f;.~ ~
-~~ff. :-:;v .. ~"WI i 1) ~ :i1"!R ~~ ~\-r.:.:ii 1f.'! ~~ ~jf,J<~ f+.~:: ·~1
~=- ;;lhTR'C: ~ ,.nn '.'.9 cf;'i -:;-,:r~:rrn I, 1) of~- ;-, .... ,tM:3ci ~.f~~"'TT1 :>1"7';:....,~!!'·H1 l<.t,~~ ,IT<l".
..... -'. ~. ·,
.,.,...,,..,,....,,._._.;,." .:.:............::.~-:-rl"ITT .,,~~'n'"l'm...,...,..,..=,~-,r,-..,,-;-,.,;, P.:t.-=1.,-.;....-~
:,-:; 1t':--'EJ ::, .. , .....
"t-'1 -· ":'i ~ ""-!.·ii'~''il 1~·. ,~ .... .:t1t..,.,. ' ·1~
--1.- 1 ~ (I ,-if'I
-~~ "1"fi'i ~ f:-::: -,z.r. ..,41Q~:i t. ~,l'f. ·;:!~~; ~ 11~.!,, f:.l;' ~
'. ➔f":i:,_ 1.rrq;:;r T::'f ~7
~.~·f-.p.f."d~ ff:' l~ ~ "3'.lft'f~ ~ -::n -rn1 ~~:-r ~ f~~f: ·~p~ f-..i·~.1 1~ ~~ '="i ~i~
~~ -=>if~'.[, ~-1-;:m ~J~~ ~~T(T -+4 "q'
3'lu.rr1 ( 1 .' -a:: '.!'I''~ < s'., ~ :;;; :: "T.'~.,,;;::,i 1n~~-· -;~, 'i>'.Tf-{ ""'. ·!:1"; .. :-~: ~;';i; .'.1 r~A'
. 474 (. )
~m 1.;. ~<i rs ;,,1
um 41 'i -w.,m.
(ll) if ~ -~ 31Pfb. ~ ~
1Ff 3lft-tf.:p:rq <fft_ ~
( 2) ~ ~
"R f.11-1fc1f&1 gfip;s,.ffllm f-;f; ell
P:!1◄1<1 ~tffiffi J;ffi ~
f-.t>m' lP-lT t, ~ ·
?;R1 '11fui fif;?.fr TP-ff t, ~ ti M1 -if-
-m~ if m ~
lg';] ~ ~if~ 3ITTlful; ~ ~
F-ti:.:iF clf@a mm« -q ~ ~
-.ft ;",Tl'>W "TT irr~. ~ t "'
f.lmt ar-:q m'ffl: l':R, 3Tlffi!-
(~) ~~~P-lft.l m ~.t'i:f.l 'lil'qf.f"'~
w.n mim f.P.ft~ mffll'F. ~ m~w. rr.
~ ffl ~l~f<'.f2JI f.,mnmv.m if ir :ff -
if;" 3Rlffl ,tt~ ~ f11f:.:i:f+.j..j ii Tfi9"iU 'tT
"<-a> itlft "fflm!I-« Wo! m 'i:Jil :wfflR 11 ~ * ~
1'1¥, '$1 u ~
( 1) ·if lWP. -~- ~ ~
·'iil-<liii+n ~- $ ~
-·a'¥6' 3;tTEIT'' aRI:~ Ff.'1.TT~ ;
"'iff afi4F14q il\i' \lRT so i!it o'lmU ( 1) ~ ~
( it) -c '!lfr.
"◄~ii+ri ~· $ ~
--~ 7.11"' aR'I:~ ~
- 1F' 31f~ <tt 1ffl1 so <fit '3'tl1UU (2) *~(~)if ~-~q;d~t
qiy"1fflSO "'1 ~(2)"% ~{<lR)if~-~~
--◄-<t◄¾<l~· _qiJ m !3Jlt ~
1@ .Jtf"'~ '6\' ttm so <.f>1 '311mU (2) "t-~-C"<fft) if~~
1FJ~<.f>1 'tll151 <f>l ~(1)$ ~*~
0'6l~t11;a; 11_-~~ (~) ~
2008 ('!fi'Jtf$1-«i._2008) ~f.mif f.61-lt
~f.mA. ~~"qt'1'1P!l-ttf~"IRI Ri"1'"( ~:11fuflft
11>. s1ao1sl 233121-~fglli:J_ '11.tos. -1.lRff * ~
348 *1,iUg < 3) % ~
-mta," (~) 31fQFfll'q, 2oos (1filtfcfi" 17 lf-l2007) ~
't- ";fflf 'Q-~ 3ti~tlljei<,
(Nu. 17 of 2008)
CHHATIISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT. 2008
An Act further to amend the ChhaUisgarh Land Revenue Code 1959 (No. 20 of
Be it enacted by the Chhallisgarh Legislature in the Fifty Ninth year oi the Republic of
This Act may be called the Chbattisgarh Land Revenue Code (Amendment)
It extends to the ~hole State of Chhallisgarh.
1t. shall come into force from the date of its publication in the official
@-dh.-111t; ~. ~·23 3l1mJ 2008
FoT Sub-section (2) and proviso of Section IOo1 the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Co.:_.,
. 1959 (No. 20 of 1959} (Hereinafter referred to ai. the Principal Act) the following ,;;h:,ll
he substi1uted. namely :-
First appeal against the order of the Collector wheth_-r
exercising. the power!- of Collector c,r Settlement Offi1: :r
during the currency ol" settlemeni, pending before the BoarJ:
Second appeal agains1 the order of the Suo-Divi!iimul
officer or the Collector pending before 1he Board :
Second appeal against the order of the Sub-Division.,!
Officer pending before the Collector:
sha1l stand transferred to the Commissioner.
All cases of revision. review and other proceedings which sto(>d
transferred to. the Board from the Commis.sioner after 2:ht
November. 2002 and pending before the Board, shall stand tran ,.
fem:d to the Commissioner ; -
In the case of revision instituted on an application made by any party
after 23rd November, 2002 and pending before the Board the party
make an application for transfer of such case 10 the
Commissioner and if such an application is made. the Board sh,ll
transfer the case to the Commissioner.
In Section 11 or the Priilcipal Code, the won!s "Commissioners (including Additional
Commissioners)" shall be inserted before the words "Settlement Commissioncc··
After Sub-section (l) of Section 12 of the Principal Act, the folinwing suh~scction sh:1\I
All Rcve'lua! Officer;; in a Division shall be subordinate to t'1e Commissioner".
After Section ! 3 or the Principal Act. the following Sections shall be inserted. namely.· -
Power tu appoint Commissioners of diYisions.-
1hc State Government shall appoint in each division a Commissirmer
who shall exercise therein the powers and discharge the Xuties
conferred and imposed on a Commissioner hy or under this Code Jr
under any other enactment for the time being in force.
The State Government may, subject to such conditions a.;, it may de~·m
fit to impose, by notification. confer upon the Commissioner any  if
the powers or functkms assigned to the Stale G()vcrnment hy lr
under any enactment for the lime being in force
Power to appoint Additional Commissioner.-
The State Government may appoint an Additional Commissioner i o a
division or in two or more divisj9ns. ·
AD Additional Commissioner shall exercise such powers and dischar.~c
such duties conferred and imposed on a Commissioner "" or under
. this Code or by or under any other enactment for.the time being in
farce in suck cases or class of cases as __ ~
State Government may, i-iy
0:Jlw1~ ~. ftRiq, 23 3Fffit zoos
. -S;----:V4 ( !:_)
a general order. notify or a.-. the Com missioner of I he di visi ;m may.
suhjccf to.any general or speci.tl restriction,; imposed hy the Stale
Government. by an order in writing direct.
Thi-.. Code and every ot hl!r cnal'.lmcnl tix I he Ii me h, in g in f(,n.::1.· .111d
an~ rule made under this Code or any such Olhcr ·l:nactrncnl ..,hall.
ex,-cpl where l!Xpressly dircc1ed othcrwisl:. appl,-
Cl,. nm i ss ioner wlu:n ex ere i sing any powers or di -.c h~ir ~in,'. ,lll y du 11e..,
under suh-scctilm (2) as i r he were the Commis.,ion1.·r nr the di\ isiou ...
A fl..:r Suh-,-,:cti.,n ( 1 1 or Scc1ion 29 of the Prim.·ipal Act. the following Sub- ,.cclil ,n shal I
he ins..:r!..:d. n~undy .
The Cnmmi-;sioner, on an application made to him in thi~ behalf nli.l}. if he i~
of the opinion that it is expedient for the ends of jm.Liee. order that any
particular case be uansfcrred from a Revenue Officer to another Revenue
Officer of an equal or supt.,'Tior rank in the same district or any other district in
In Suh-!-.ccti(;n (2) or Section JO of the Principal Act, before the word "Collector"' the
WQrds and comma "Commissioner, a" shall be inserted.
In Section 44 of the Principal Act:-
In clause ( c) of Sub-section (1 ) for the words .. Board of Revenue" the word
"Commissioner" shaH be substituted.
In clause ( g I of Suh--section ( I ) before the words · .. Settlement Commissioner"
th~ words '"Commissioner or the" shall be inserted.
For Sub-section (2) the Section 44 of the Principal Act,. following shall be
Save as otherwise provided a second appeal shall lie· against every
or'1er passed in first appeal under this Code or the rules made
by the Suh-Divisional Officer or. the Collector to the
by the Settlement Officer to the Settlement CommiMioner.
by the Commissioner to the Boatd-
· if the original onfer has i.n dtc .fust appeal been
. varied or reversed otherwise than in a mauer of cost;
on any of the following grounds aild no Olher,
that the order is comrary 10 1aw °" usace
having the force of law; or
that the order has failed to det«mine ~
material i:ssue of law «IUl8ge lavingfOl':C .
· of law; or
defect in ihe procedure as pracribed by _
this Code. which may have produced.error
. or defect in lhe d:ecision of the case upon
.. After clause (a) of Section 47 of the Principal Act. the following dauSc: shall he
to the Commissio.,er after the expiration of sixty days from such date: or."
In Sub-section (1) of Section 50 of the Principal Act, after the won.ls .. Tl,c
Board" the words "or th~ C'ommi.ssioncr" shall be ·insened.
hi .Suh-cl;i.use ( c) of clause ( i) of the pro ... iso to Sub,.:section ( I ) of _Sect ion 50
of the Principal Act. before the words "the Senie_mel1t Commissioner" the worrt-;
"Commissioner or'.' ~hall he inserted.·
1n clause (ii) of the proviso to Suh-section ( I ). of Section 50 of the Princip II
"the Settlemen1 Commissioner... the
·'Commissioner or" shall be inserted.
In clause ( i) of Sub-section (2) of Section 50 of the Principal Act. before ti .c
words "the Settlemcnl Commissioner" the words "Commissioner cir" shall 1-e
In cl"use (ii) of Suh-section (2) of Section SO of the Prinici pal AL·t. he fore I I c
words "the Settlement Commissioner" the words. "Commissioner or" shall r ~
In clause (iii) of Sub-section (2 J of Section 50 of the Prine ipal Act he fore the
words "Settlement Commissioner" wherever 1hey occur the word "Commi..-
sioner," shall he inserted.
In clause (iv) of Sub-section (2) of Section 50 of the Princi~i Af.t, hefrwc
the words "the Seulement Commissioner" the words "the Cnmmis..~ioncr w"
. In clause (i) of the proviso to Sub-sc.ction ( I ) of Section 51 of the Principal Ac1. after tl1c
words "If the" the word ''Commissioner," shall he insert~ .
The Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code (Amendm-!ntJ Ordinance. 200M ( No. 1 · of 200~ t
Provided that the repeal shall not affect the previous orcrati,m of tl.e
Ordinance so repeated as if this Act had fflll been passed.
-~ 1m: it 3RP'@ ~-
~-PlG ~. (~ 61<6'
Wfi?:) ~mti 3li1ffi. ~
11 "If{ 2011-~ 21, ff 1933
Fffq am~ cJi1if F:f'WJ
33 79/sl -3TM./0. lJ./11.
ilffi l-Pli; f cfl1A lt'I.Jp.'fil f.tt.:tf clf€1d ~~in:~ 03-05-2011
~1 <ill-l<tilU it~V<fim"~'1ffffl t°.
~ 'ff'I it~ aub111«1t,
'it. -cft. imam, -atr-~ .
7'-~; f.t-!'i·'6" , ~ .:~t° 201 l
fflttlf 'l.-tNH4 tiQnl ( ~)
eil1t11¥ 1;-lRR'lliflar, 1959(11i1Ai 201F[_ 19S9 )if at\ tWRW-tfflq 34Jllfllca11.
iJ'M'tt'P! 'I.-~ tml, 1959 (llilni 20 lFf. 1959) (;i' ~-~
a1f.-lf.14q .- lli'lf ~ f-11& t>."" "1PJ 59 cit~ c 1> ~
"{IJq cm * ~
f.tqftiifttd 1IOg itRl':lllN fft;q '311',, 3l1!IR{ :-
··<>. (lf) R (.r)_ ..
.. , .. ) __._~
111'.! 59 lift cl1fllRf (2) - ~
""\'fvf alt fif; "=N1'4!{fwlv llflrih<it i&l-,Pr &Md1 it"fl: f.Nkur1'
11.'1 atf1llf-1:qq iil llRI 59 ~'a1111RJ cs> '4--...;:  aqaq altiiti,it" ~llil=r1«, ~-·
·'WIPl 11N¥ftl1 ... d'ia Mill~
1n ii. -.i 1&11 ~
.,, ... ,, adllRI · aF111t, %°lllR'tR~
"'1111111 1ifil¥Rl · safaM1fiN 1%-.-~
ad'elf.tqq lit lUU 172 ill~ (4) 'il. lPli:~llm· ,~~. 1Plf: ~"f(cl>
a1NF-t4il  f.lm 112 c5i "31:1IIU Cs> 'it,~~ 11 ffl' tN ·-.OU~~
lllff-1R. 1111: "i(llri"Pff ffl' ll1U  liffl' yfij'4fqij ftt>l:!--t.
adf.ll~4q c6l 'qRJ 1n cf3 a'li\1RI C 6-'1>) 'il. 1f'i: '"Q.<5 ti m- ifi"lillr-f"lR. 11.:
'"'ft 1ft ... 5ilra:&tlfk'l N1P. ~1s!.
atfiitf-14G 1$1' IJIU ::;,,;;. I <F.f o'illiti { 4-) -:q_ .!t~< -ti-.~ ffl"' t'alR "lff, -
T~ ~i,r Sifu"~lR't; i~<i ;;r,..,-__
cf,1 mn 247 cfft ~
(7) if;~if. ~<1%l ~ ''"Q:$'~m· au;rr
QR( 247 -q;y 1triltR.
m. ~ lll.ITT' lR, ~ -~ ~
m' 9fa:p,;.i1r:ia f<f><n ~-
7.fft mu 248 ~ otlmu ( 1) ii,~ ·'lITG ~
m· ii\lT .. ~
Qffl 2 48 "lfif "li~mR
m· a2TT --~ ";ft m· '>lfoft!.IINd f~ 7ii!'Tli.
-~ 1f;JfR ffl' ',l@?IINd ~
~ ~,it tTIU 250 "'1~ (6) "if,~~ "HI~~,$ 'P-rR lR,
m· !.lfaft11f'-lti r~ ~-
~~.tr mu 2so cf>l"~ c 9) ll, ~
m· ~ ~-qi:, ~
..~ ~ m· !,l@+tJ1fi.lt1 ~
-qm lft ffl' Sl@fqlNd ~
1F( ~<fii tnU 2s3qft~ (1) if, lr-G'~~m-~~~ ~-~ QRf 253 'llIT lifflaR.
~, Slfo~lf'-lti Ffim ~
3379,it_ 11w21- 31/M.m. l'J.111.- -1fflt'I ~ mitR ~ ~
(3) % "~ ii mih-M1 11.-
mtm' (-mll'-R) a-n~. 2011 (~ 14 lfl.2011) <Iii~~~% WIT<l>R "i:1 ~
TIIE CHHA TIISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2011 ·
An Act furthe[" to IUllend the Lhhattisgarh'Land Reven~ Code, 1959 (No. 20 of
Be ii enacted by the Chhattisgarh Legislature in the Sixty-second ye;n- of the Republic
of India, as follows :-
This Act may be called the Chhanisgarh Land Revenue Cod,- {Amendment)
Act, 201 I. - -
It shall come into force from the dat.e of its publication in the Official Gazette.
After clause (e) of sub-section (1) of Section 59 of the Chhanisgarh La.rid ►
Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of 1959), (hereinafter referred to as the Princi-
pal Act), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
'"(f), (g) and (h)."
After clause (e) of sub-section (I) of Section 59, the following clauses shall be
After proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 59 the. following proviso shaJI be
"Provided f unher that the Nay a Raipur Development Authority shall be ex-
empted from re-assessment for the diversion of land."
In sub-section (5) of Section 59 of the Principal Act, for· the words ''Sub-
Divisional Officer" the words "Competent Authority" shall be substituted.
ln Section 172 of the Principal Act, for the words "Sub-Divisional_
Officer"wherever they occur the words ''C.ompetent Authority" shall be subs-
In sub-section ( 4) of Section 172 of the Principal Act, for the words "two
hundred rupees" the words "one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
In sub-section (5) of Section 172 of the Principal Act, for the words "two
hundred rupees" and "twenty rupees" the words "one thousand rupees" and
"one hundred rupees" shall be subsituted.
In sub-section ( 6-a) of Section 172 of the Principal Act, for the words "one
hundred rupees" the words "five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
In sub-section ( 4) of Section 241 of the Principal Act, for the words "five thousand
rupees" the words "twenty five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
In proviso to sub-section (7) of Section 247 of the Principal Act, for the words "one
thousand rupees" wherever they occur the words "twenty five thousand rupees" shall
In sub-section (1) of Section 248 of the Principal Act, for the words "five
thousand rupees· and "twenty rupees" the words "twenty five thousand
rupees" and ''two hundred rupees" shall be substituted. :·,~ -_
In sub-section (2) of Section 248 of the Principal Act, for the words "one
thousand five hundred rupees" the word, "ten thousand rupees" shall be sub-
fa sub-s;;-ction (6) of Section 250 of the Principal Act, for ~he words "two hun-
dred fifty rupees" the words "one thousand rupees'' shall be substituted.
In sub-se.ction (9) of Section 250 of the Principal Ac\, for the words '"five
thousand rupees" tht: words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted .
In proviso to sub-section (9) of Section 250 of the Principal Act, for the .words
"one thousand five hundred rupees" the words "five thousand rupees" shall be
In sub-section (4) of Section 250-B of the Principal Act, for the words "one
hundred rupees" the words ''five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
In sub-section (l) of Section 253 of the Principal Act, for the words "one thousand
rupees" rhe words "twenty five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
2012-'lfttf 26; wt, 1933
-fcutl afR fer~ ffl FNJTl .
314/tt. -3J/11I./if. TfJ12. 0'cfttt~ fcNR """'if>I f➔"1fctf&tt ~
% -;uq ~ .{ftll 41R:¥11j,(,II{,
(~, 4 lFl 2012)
0-dl:e1~ ,:--~lftai. 1959 (st,.:ljif." 20Wl_ 1959) (;;n~~~-118
231 <tt <I'l-1a1m (3) if;-~ lR Hl-ifctf&tt wfaf\'.l.1Nt1 ~
(1) *~ (D) 1T afci:tfEild tpll cfil ~
(1) *-uus-<~) ififlllfa-at1m11<fit~~ "]fq~~~1mffffi
~ ~<f.l 'if4""' 3Rl~~fflQ",. "'-'"I~.~.-~
nlfflir, aw@@, ~. <li'fa;;;r, ~
<fif '3"ffff'f 1U oP-J f.fiffl t11tfa1fiifi TilR'I q,l
qfl4hH1atl Jmrf.tnJatllRR~ ~~'illlt ~~
atNf-il.lli <fit '!tW 237 "<61' _
;ar.f-'ffil ( 3) ~ ~
f.tqf ctf <iJd ~
;w-lJIU (1) it aftt1fun~~@lt ~mi Tft 1lfil efiT
Uiiq "fflWI ofit ~
Wi'f '.'ffllR i;RJ ~
ffilt -31qfo;:14 ~ ~
~ <J1i-'IRT (3) -q UfaJfctd ffl %°, tfif
314m. 16i21-3I/Yl.JiJ. -rt.tn-'l:ft'"«l <li ~
348 if> UV& (3) "% ~
"% .... 'd(41Uft, ~
(No_ 4 of 1.(112)
CHHA1TISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE {A~fE!\'DMENT) ACT.2011
Ao Act further to ame~ the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 2D of
Be it enacted by the Chhattisgarh -Legislature in the Sixty-second Y.ear of lhe Re-
public of India. as follows:-
This Act may be called the Chhaltisgarh Land Revenue Code (Amendment)
It ~II come into force from the date of il'i publication in the O~ciaJ
Sub-section {2) of Section 237 of the Chbattisg&Th Land Revenue Code,
1959 (No. 20 of 1959) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act). shall be
For sub-section (l) of Section 237 oflhe_Principal Ac_t. the following shall
be substituted. namely :-
Subject to~ rules made under this Code, die Collector after
seeming lhc land mentioned in clause (b) or sub-section (I) to mini-
mum two pea:ent of the total agriculture Jand of that village, may
divert such exoess land as menridned in clause (b) of sub-section
( l) iolO any other purposes as agriculture, abadi, construction of
roads. canals. tanks. hosp:itals, schools. colleges, power scation,
gausbalas, excavation o( day by potters (kumhart.) or aoy other
public utility projects as may be detenoined,.py the Srare Govem-
After sub-section (3) of Section 237 of the Principal Ac 1, the following shall
be added. -namely :-
When it becomes indispensable to divert the land set apart for the
purposes mentioned in sub-section (I) for such projects which are
owned or approved by lhe State GovC1DB1Cnt, but not cove~ -
under sub-section (3). the Collector, after- satisfying himself that
altema.tivc Jaud of equivalent area bas lice\ made available for
fulfilling the same Ni.star Rights. may divert ihe land for such
purposes by pissing a reasoned order to this effect."
2012-'lfttf 26; wt, 1933
-fcutl afR fer~ ffl FNJTl .
314/tt. -3J/11I./if. TfJ12. 0'cfttt~ fcNR """'if>I f➔"1fctf&tt ~
% -;uq ~ .{ftll 41R:¥11j,(,II{,
(~, 4 lFl 2012)
0-dl:e1~ ,:--~lftai. 1959 (st,.:ljif." 20Wl_ 1959) (;;n~~~-118
231 <tt <I'l-1a1m (3) if;-~ lR Hl-ifctf&tt wfaf\'.l.1Nt1 ~
(1) *~ (D) 1T afci:tfEild tpll cfil ~
(1) *-uus-<~) ififlllfa-at1m11<fit~~ "]fq~~~1mffffi
~ ~<f.l 'if4""' 3Rl~~fflQ",. "'-'"I~.~.-~
nlfflir, aw@@, ~. <li'fa;;;r, ~
<fif '3"ffff'f 1U oP-J f.fiffl t11tfa1fiifi TilR'I q,l
qfl4hH1atl Jmrf.tnJatllRR~ ~~'illlt ~~
atNf-il.lli <fit '!tW 237 "<61' _
;ar.f-'ffil ( 3) ~ ~
f.tqf ctf <iJd ~
;w-lJIU (1) it aftt1fun~~@lt ~mi Tft 1lfil efiT
Uiiq "fflWI ofit ~
Wi'f '.'ffllR i;RJ ~
ffilt -31qfo;:14 ~ ~
~ <J1i-'IRT (3) -q UfaJfctd ffl %°, tfif
314m. 16i21-3I/Yl.JiJ. -rt.tn-'l:ft'"«l <li ~
348 if> UV& (3) "% ~
"% .... 'd(41Uft, ~
(No_ 4 of 1.(112)
CHHA1TISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE {A~fE!\'DMENT) ACT.2011
Ao Act further to ame~ the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 2D of
Be it enacted by the Chhattisgarh -Legislature in the Sixty-second Y.ear of lhe Re-
public of India. as follows:-
This Act may be called the Chhaltisgarh Land Revenue Code (Amendment)
It ~II come into force from the date of il'i publication in the O~ciaJ
Sub-section {2) of Section 237 of the Chbattisg&Th Land Revenue Code,
1959 (No. 20 of 1959) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act). shall be
For sub-section (l) of Section 237 oflhe_Principal Ac_t. the following shall
be substituted. namely :-
Subject to~ rules made under this Code, die Collector after
seeming lhc land mentioned in clause (b) or sub-section (I) to mini-
mum two pea:ent of the total agriculture Jand of that village, may
divert such exoess land as menridned in clause (b) of sub-section
( l) iolO any other purposes as agriculture, abadi, construction of
roads. canals. tanks. hosp:itals, schools. colleges, power scation,
gausbalas, excavation o( day by potters (kumhart.) or aoy other
public utility projects as may be detenoined,.py the Srare Govem-
After sub-section (3) of Section 237 of the Principal Ac 1, the following shall
be added. -namely :-
When it becomes indispensable to divert the land set apart for the
purposes mentioned in sub-section (I) for such projects which are
owned or approved by lhe State GovC1DB1Cnt, but not cove~ -
under sub-section (3). the Collector, after- satisfying himself that
altema.tivc Jaud of equivalent area bas lice\ made available for
fulfilling the same Ni.star Rights. may divert ihe land for such
purposes by pissing a reasoned order to this effect."
..... ..:, . -'-~: =:: ..,_ ·::--.
~) <fi" iqariff ~- ~
\iTI'. 2-22-@iflt:,a1i; 'JFil'Z/38 fit~-
4 'til 2012-~ 14, lfc&" 1934
3717ni. 130121-a:r.tm-./iJ.Tf.112. 0ffltlli! fqtJR lNI W F-t¥.if@Md 31fi.if.:t4q f.>ttPR.fc:"ff 16-04-
2012 <bl lfiqq@ if>i ~mm 'jifft t, ~I tt.ftllQl{OI <li1 ~
.· . .,_. ·.
. · .. ..:·!".
€§ffifli~ 'i"~lfmn. 1959 (ii. 20lr-f_ 1959) {~~~~~~~
·~ ~ 3fttfcti'~lttt'ffl'1'ft ~--=cfR'q ~
mu (1) t- ~
-~ P ~ - tr, 13012 · w,..-,19 .i'l.112. -
( 3) ~ ~
15, ~. it(itlUfit ~
. .i · .
(No. 13 of 2012}
CHHAITISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE (AMENDMEJ\'11 AC1: 2012
An Ad further to amend the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (So. 20 of
Be ir enacted by the Chhanisgarh Legislatu_Jt in the Si.x:ty-thfrd Year of the Republic
of India, as follows:-
This Act may be called the ChhaUisgarh Land Revenue Code (Arnenlhnent)
IL shall come intb force from the date of its publication in the Official
For second proviso of sub-section (2) of Section 59 of the Olhattisgarh Land
Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of 1959), (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act).
the following proviso shall be substituted, namely :-
.. Provided further that the land developed by an authority l>I boc!} t",:,rpi,,.ir-e
established by State Govemment for the purpose of clause (f) of sub-section (;; of
Section 59 as specified in Schedule-IV of this Code, shali be exempted. from re-
assessment for the diversion of land.
After Schedule-Ill of the Principal Act, the following Schedule-IV shalJ be li..dcied,
[ See Section 59 (2} ]
~l"'*' ~ -::;.re- 'lj1ffifl (ftFn sft>
@'dlM~ fcr!lR 11'lf <bl f-li:::tftHf&d dlf~ f.im tn: ~
G'i11t-p I~ ?f.' ~
-=rrrl' ll 'ij'll :jj1<:ltlj'i1R.
cli. 1.tfl. ill{QIUft, ~
0'dl+lI~ "i,-~ ~. 1959 ( ~
20 l1'1_ 1959 ) ~ aflT ffl'fira ~
~j +fl 6  114 'Ii_-~ ;tftm, 1959 ( sf;, 20 '{I;, 19 59) <1iT "-Tm 23 7 qfj- et!-"1TU ( 3) "ll, ~
"<iin orf01, .:,;~, ~
f.Rril, m, i'l@Tol;, ~. ~. ~. ~
(~) 'ID'U~<f.T~~ ~1%'m +11ci-11f1cfi ~~
J<r. {t.,..-t ~;iTI ~"'111;,XI I ~'<1 "il'l{· ~ ~T-! 'ti\~ ''t!?.ff 'rl'l, ~.
~f-rGfuT, ~. ~. ~, ~.
ID"{! fi,'{it cfii ~. 'rfru! 'ls'f.r"1 ~ ~
'3"9'<WT ~ qf{.ql<il-il~ irm f% ~
W{l atqmfuf m'f ~ ~
;;t"-'-i'~ i ::'°"·'m. :.+·2":- ·-':.1·,-~F, .. ,"'~3. 1'1,/13.--~~ ~ ~i..TT, ~ ~~}'~ 3-4~ ~ ~
( .3) ~ ~~
..; iF, :-: I ( ~t.i?. ·1 .ef.~f:n:n::r. 2 C 12 ( ~i:r ' ':11. 2013 ) <F.T ~ .~ .;! :ii '1.'~!-: ' 1 .... -~ '➔:,., ~ :B'JCt.17 ii i.!_il e_;! l.l '.,f:f.!f.irl i"f, -~ I
(No. l of 2013;
CHHATTISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE (Ai\.-IENDMENTJ ACT, 2012
An Act further to amend the .Chhattisgarh Land ttevenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of
Be it enacted by the Chhattisgarh Legislature in the Sixty-third Y~ar of the Re-puh!ir:
of India. as follows :-
This Act may be called the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code (Amendment)
It shall come into force from the date of its publication in the Offici;;I
in sub-section (3) of Section 237 of the Chhauisgarh Lant! Revt!nue Code. 1959
(No. 20 of 19 59 J for the words ''as agricu I tun~, abad i, con st ruction of roads, canals.
tanks, hospitals. schools, colleges, power station. gaushalas, excavation of clay by
potters (kumhars) or any other public utility projects as may be determined by the
State Government.", !he words "as agriculture, abadi, residential projects, construe
tion of roads, canals, tanks, hospitals, schools, colleges, Government offices, public
godown,~. r<1wer system. gausha!as. e.itcavation of clay hy potter~. minor miner:i:ls or
any other public utility projects as may he determined. by the State Government."
shall be substiruted .
.. ..... , ,._.._, ......... , .. - ----·-------------·--·--·· -
. ._, __ ..._._,, ____ --- ----~·· , .......... - ~- ...... ,_ - ·- ·-·· -
-:!I'-:., ..... i3-, .-.;J"""! .,.--,.
~.~ ~:: ...... ~ r-
~ ·-·----- -. -~ .:. ·- ~-~...i
....... - ~::.;:. · .....
..:: ,; .. 7:i:.;:·..:..:-;.:_ ~· ·
".1-J~ ~ 3fl1IG.T i;r,fEr,l ~1PT
-i$H~I lfcf"f, lf';lfcfrf. ~
'~'-fl 4-45 / f1,·~l-1 / 2.006
~J:ff.7 CD~~~ -:h:. ~,
·~)ci; -d l I 4
'-l1F=1$I ·'t-i--!iit, 817 /2006 i;:.:r.11· .... ,~·.cl'-' ~ct ]Fr:- jq{'c.~ \3TT1;·~11;:; ~lltl", if
· .. Jn ·M I :.:rum IC: '1 kb 5. 11 . 2012 cf, Jr~ fIT<fa i
~tf ~..:rrr, cnT 5\11'./" $+1!,.r, 1372 /~ 4-15 / f!l<J / 2006 ~'!. f?;-,-tr, 21.7.2006
cpf qyrm 3fBH,--! m '=nT cn!cc. cf.t ! B:-<11<..~i1, 1,-{1.t.f<'I {ii6d!
(-!1..:iitR) .:::~. 2oos(q:> B ~
2006) '$ f$'m-.-q~ ~ ~o ~
..£11liicf4 ~&!~ ,i, ~~i;i~r
cTTR R llif-aifi! ~
817 /2006 ID1T ~
9.52006 7.'!,1" t%17A ~lll ~141 'ill. f..,,x,ct,! Ylc1'1
'J ~·m-q" ™ ~ i~
k: Tcfi!lf "1fm 2Tf I
'iRO 'd'f.;<.l .C'-fflllc1£1 $" ~
817 /2006 ~ 41Mcf>icf,qj3ff
ijfF{ * qR011'1-c-f.lm4 . ~o ~~ .;,:u:1.11&P-1 M&ltfl~I( ~
Tcffi ffi! ll!Rlcol FRffl ~ vlT j,ihl % ?iW ~~~~"ITT 1,¢1 % ~
E" f.6 ~dm~,~ ·it-.-'lr-;;+Rf ~
2005(',;;_ a ~ 2006) :ii ~l<:tf.lHtjtIH. "-1:_'-!-!.ll ~ ~
3!JJm~ m1Jcw:f1 ~-:,llf 'TiAT ~R~-aci
~ I ~~ {-le{~ if ~
-2f ~""<AT €m 'Jilct4> $1if q, 1607 /fmu ~
fil~i Ji~ fu"liT t 1$- .. · "11"1'114 -:.a:zi: ~-1..jtlH,:,lll it ~
.51fc!M<..ill. 200s cf, Rl-.illFc!ch -q1 ~~--tR R_q1 m I q;f.'lq:i1cp<.:113i1' tm ~1ftlq,1 ~
c.t>I q'iPTTf cl ffi1 (; ~
q, q R111 fi-/fcli'iff n·f;fi<.j '3"i'xf -xilll 1C'1 lJ -gm ~
~c qJlifq]f r~'{'('{'j ~ mT ij,q;) -g rR-!7' t"'-H1 ~!~;/I ~
-g'y 1},¢1 -g I # if 3ic.1 B-:·dh·P!i$
1;, ... 'TI'..,1f4 t1115-,, \~¥11.f'f
3ilEJ~.q-1, 2005 q, \.l!..;i:il"71j7HR iq1&l 3l:!,-M4 ctil-Q..:ir.5l
1cpq ,;i1-, +:f /
0:.:;._<'. ' .. WI i:P~ ~
+:f iq;q ~Pl q)!~ GT,:.,'T .-:,5, -g I"
·: =..r, .t----48 .. --F,Tff~~
-~ : . . .
--- - ; ?-
.... -_ ~: ~-=
i i I I l
·ftj.:J~l.j rirJ.s: ii" ~
,fTTIR ( m ~
~) ~ m fq 3fJ:fa. ~
o'l'. 2 22 ,9"11J.Pi~ r>Ri3Rfu. U.
30 5- 200 1 ..
,1 rri-:;: 3€-7 I
mf~ cfi H ~ .,_ cfi I fit I a
fcTTQ afR -fc{m-tjt ffl fcf~
~- f.;::rrcfi 19 3Prnf 2013
·-,~,11w 1~,Tf10912012 - 201 s:·
,nTTI'<f. 7ss1,si. 2s412 1 -3T!SITT<'.m. TJ./13.-waltPI~ fcJtITT "H~TI cfi1 f.11-.:ifof@a dff~ f;;m 11'{ ~
2013 <fil~ ~ ~~m~
if;- ,ri:r it om 61.,.,..1<=~11j..,.,.t1TTT1<.
.. : .. 2::.taj.
!:~ 'tb. dk: ~ .. I  kaj l:tllliJ jllh "/ ! ( l ) Lill~ hl. \:;:tc lS lllt! ~'£!. b..h_tjt-sJK k2.h
-~ J.t&J l!bJlt~b .. \ 9[ "l:L
1:£ £96l) £96 l 'hlcl:;:Jt1jl:£ lh.\.illJh·· ~j.ltt.1-> ~ ~Ci. "ili.illd::lg- .. (6 '1--!t&!"t-L':t- ~06l !
,06L '-2:fdl Hl:(bjl::-!J ~-· ~
~';:_>--..<lit~ (.':E.) .211.e.l..~ 9t> lliE l'£ W,kjl:..jl:,': t,,__h_
.. ·1~ l.t&.J. l:l2l'i ralfi. !:l'@. ~
8tk.t. Ll.e. ~~Jl:l: l:111? ~ ![' 'JJll?j?l'l? '~ l-\lh ~
~dk_ l.l:,_!:aj llli.J-lhl: ~.1£ PAJ~bl,J '/-! ( l ) lrlt~ b.£. ~ 9£ ill.ti h'£ hhl:Jt~l'c 1-J-i.
.. : .. Hij
'lb. 8..t?i--.t. ~ . 1 .. ~
Wll?J- ¥J.b. '.!-.}.. ( l ) wti - b.£. l:':12. 9£ illh ~
~l:r. lil,Jib.Js. .. ~
'lli 8tn ~ . .8li:'llf ... ;>-,Jr. 'h.· ( £) l.r.Lt~ - b.£-\;'!,'- 5£ llib J;'tc
~c-.rl!JIS. -~ .':8l .. ~
·m t'.!...1-;rt ~ .Ji.lec.h-- ~
·g ( L.) 2'.LLfil. ~ 17£ ill.t~ ~ b.W:;:lt-tlK b!h
l.!£ lajlb 14J.!hl::J-lil::ililc ~ !!il;(ljll/:zj I-~~~~~
i:.1Jli£' ~ OOOl 'b.1:,_tj
lcl-"1.~ l:tJ..-.£. llil~ l!:lE. lhll:.r!. I!£:. ).b!~f1J '.t,.!i:>l,tlh. ~
lliill,. ~lr l::rlJ-1@ tJ.i. ~
l:c.JJ"tl'.c ~ (l .!:t-l.!£:.668L) c68L 'hld~.t:j.tl: 1:ai2iWJllih i~.hJ1£ \!--l".t,lli~ .. (.':E. ill) ..
-: ~ tdt'c 't:li" lt?'-1""":J
~ ( lu.) ~.:II.FL '~ ( l) wt~ h.£ ~ l Wh ~
~ ~ ~l:J- ~ h2t
'it hltl:,jt-sjll': ld1. illE.lli ~~
_1:ili_:;_ H£.) ' ( 6'i6( kb-. Ol ~) 6561 'lllilJ.tt ~t [b ~l1hJ}-!~:.
( noc: l:.ti c:£ ~)
l::tl:?.~_.j.1£' ~, t ct lf:@
1:.111.J.Grr !'1,. ~ Le Jr,
1-J<'l m~~f-;cp;4 cti"t i:rm 52 "fil~:..~mt ( 2) ir, f-1.-..if11f&11 <l-Rf:uq1fr@ ~
.. 'tfql 3lR.1il i-fil f-lCilllG1, ~-.w.it,(IT'{~~ ~
nrrra. ~ ~~ m. oqj~ffi\t~1'tTIFfilfl~.--
1J<'lm'~cfi)1-m152~"3'1:t mu (3)ri, 1'.JffuWJITT · 1·· "a.fi" ?-IA"R. ~
.. : . ~
ci) mTI 52 <fil "3ll- '"ml ( 3 ) if, f,.-..ift:1f(§ct 3Rl:roqa ~
--~ ~ ~- ~
'<fR if,~ Tffi':' if a:ifirci; 7.il -Wlffi ~
~- ->II ·1i1 \f~~ {':I, '.1'-l> ~ lrn:!_ ~
TT"' · -.firf.,>m -ot 'llJf
-~~ ~ M -~ fuf'it~l--f "Q_~, 1908 ( 1908 ~
1.f~ 9 ) .. 3m " tfrrq,;flli""r qi nrR i:n:. ;:f,lffl: ~
. a:.tcf; utn m --~ ~
,_ , ,., .. ,., t,I ·., . .;,oJ
,w~i-t-~· ·~i ,.m1 54 -:f,"DfFT-.:.P , Ri=frc:--ms@mt~~~. 3.lllR! :-
,, ~1-~f'-t Tj ~
.. -11f ''i lf-.,J.L-;f -tjf-,{rtJ ( ~-A) ef,,-Jf.p.Jq_ 2013 ~ '!1<1..-J r.H "&, ol<fi 1Jci
,11Q_1u o:1i.n AA~ "fil 7;fftM'J. TfAJ 1% w m~. ~
"CJ 1.m it ..
1-!M i:)llmP~tl -=t,i ~m 57 i'iil~-lffll (2)-it, ~
lF=I Jffemi:r <fil Jmi s9 cf>1 ~ -l-ffll o -<fi) -q, ~ -~
µ'fR 1R, ~ ums9151~
--H~fll ~-- ~"t@ fifi1-11 ~ -
~ <Hf~ <8 ~mi 81 cF,I 69" tlTTI ( 4) "$ ~
"'l'.R, f.:p:.1f<1f!91t \.I~ fcf,m
i11 .,rff1_..,.,ir..r-ii ~--I', frn:!_ ~
<fil 7jffffl ~~"l'f.c.i~h~..iWJJ, '1-,Til] s9 ~
3-1~.ITT ··T-lf-ii tp.l ~
<J.i '-mt 98 ~ l'fA lR, f➔'"ff("(i&d Yfd+-'-IINd FcPn ~. 3l'flij :-
f..nm:01.-,-fit ~~-~~..,;"II~ \}_fif q,"J~ f.Nttut, qru
q,1-;,nTeft '1fq cfil<ITTffl FrQR1JT, ~ml 59 ~3M"!~
trW ltc'f:J bllijl_!illaj. 1_:E. .\t. illfil?jti li~- ~ ~ lir,:
.. ~ ~ .. ~
'1L. ~ltn 'f:'. -~ 1.L'.-hl. .. ~
·-~ £vl J.llr1 JJ;. WiJ;,J.hJK .8.Ii
fil. i? '~ lp.12. ~
~ filJllt !_hr_ ·~ lli.u l.tt.;tj ~~
lif. g:c-41!. ~ ~
1l.:.J511:'2 % !£.Z<l.1:1; ~lc!j ~
.1:_u) f=-9. l'-1:! L:Ur.. ~c.Ji'..14. ~112. ~> 1.1.L-t~ Jb?;? ~
~ ·i~~R-~~- 1~~~ a.£.!~~~ll!-£ ~~~
~ti?~~~ lli?J.tl2 J_l:J.2.tl!.i. Illaj ~ !Mt~ WQ- .!i.e.~··~ llllil I,~ ·~ fil 1:<.bP..J
tjlil€ ~ L £ L illt~ I~ ·~ ll~ ~
+Jilll9-. ti~ ., Wtt.h.£. !Will. ~ hj!b !:e.l;.~l.ti lrt. ah ~ lhll'.i. lill.dJ:l. ~
.:aj. ~~fut. ~ )t>k)Lh \lP JJ:caj. :wi --~~
-: l4"61Z '!fl~ 1.1:daj. llbJill;".t.!Wi illd_J}_;jhl.:J. 'lli Hrtl ~ ££ L !ill;. ~
.J.J.ti J:i2.,, 22.lk. 'lli l.:lli:r_ % --~ ':!ill .. ~
'R- l£ l Llln ~ hhlJhjl£ ~
-~ 1_!:t. .'Ell,, ~
'J;t. ( l J ill.fa - b.£ ~
81'. l lllii ~ l::!l:J:Jl:lj.1£ lilll.
.. ·iw_:1 h$- ~...e /?- ~
~ 11:tl':eE. .'E. ~ll-t~ ~ '~
L'-E !&JJµ-W:, ~r's ':lillj!,K [!- t,h__'l t.ll-:;l e.!h. 11.2.H-lf-iJill. If '% I~
Y-1: llilJt .'!:- filb. .':eil. llce..ti ~
l.:JJ~K ~ _lp.h.tj a.l..t. ~
!4r1K ~ Ol L
Jill!. ~~JH=: \~_hlJl>-Jt-;. ·1lliJc.K hlr !f'FJ Pr:lJt# l:c.l_td:£ ~ . ll l :r1t-1. (:Jc:. L l ..
lllij.!t5".t.: l!:.l.: ill'>lj~bJ..:::I '1.1 ~r.h :~ I l ) l'tlt bl:. J='f. 6l L LJ.lB (;':E.1:!hk?1JYr. l:1.h
't,:-li... l~J 1-lli_JH,:i!!jtJ. .)ii"~
'lli 8ra::t. ~ -~-- ~
.J-:. ( L ) .Wt; h.£ ~ 6l L llli1 ~
.. ·u--~ l.hlt. lt...':i--J- ~l:c. ill,h 2.t,_ ':!zj. ~
ll1l"f]~ i~ llli!:J. .t.J!Eli b...'i
hllt-;I,J l~ 1-?-lfil. ~
!.Et,_ '~ illli .lli.Y::..J llt!h. We. td:!li ;,r,. l_/:i..';aj. lb. ti@. ~
la t.b J µ~-, hk!J ~ ~
!-_l. t-ia lLJ ~ ~
: @ ~ ldJ.t..1± It.<.
eilill -r. lcl4 'I;!. LI.a.a '_<.6 g:,_hdb. .t:c:J:,;: I GI.!. ~ ~
~ l::.U.d2 lh. etJ£..ll h ~
lul~MJ J# 'l,?l. lH.JP-- 1,,rtll'c ll ~; .a ·~ ~ ~ ~
~ -~ .l::..lJJ.Jd 1h. 2i.lill -1; Ii.£. '8- ~
l_.'f?. µ,.Jaj!~ rcit 1t3Q ·~ ~
.'f!J.?- -~ lrJ~lli:h J#:. '.<r: HI.LY-! lh 2i!ill-h lif.. 't1162 ~ajli h~ 'Li
lli.aj!J-!:i llieli. fil .:aj J? Jru.µi1:,_J- ~
'lla JU;,t l.k l.h..'.:t;;J ~ ~- ~ i1-;;13.1.:h
lo.i.!h!:J tl±.E -~ t;~ cEj. ~1:rl<'J '% L.fil. J~ lt<..':aj. llBJ , 1:1<'.....ip.l'i ~
'-~ I.LG2. ~ ~. I::.£. -
. 00 I . -
: PJl61:1': 'l:":lk lrt.!PJ l~.h:JJ!hllJ.15 Pf-rj},j-Jl'll!.! '.t.hH'u ~ oo: l.l ih !_'1> Hd-Jr,jl-£ Pli
·tt1.1£: ltd>J h-1_1,l I.'£ 66 illr-1 t* btr.1.-Jt~1:1: ldh
1;1c'1 .m~ c8 mu 165 c.fi1 ""3-1- mu ( 4 ) ifi" ~.,, f1 C-Jfc:-1f@1 1R :~ ff.7.TT ~,
urn 11, s ~ ~-
. '-mi ( l) -i1' ~
fcori\ ma ~ ~
s'Q. 'lfl, ·<fTI 'lfq ,:q, i:f1 wr-=i1 <f,f'q
cfll ·3'RR111 ~ ~
~ ,ii qiTT]'J, ~ 91 J..<1Fc-ii, ~
t . ~-TTl"3'1t- mtf~~.,~fu,J, ··3'RR"1f·cf.J 3TI~~.
f 1 C-J fr1 furn BM f -rn 'ffi rn, 3'.J?-WI_ :-
"i'i'~-1 c.fTITffi ~ cfm<lo it" &TD ~
-i;r:ITsf-1 "f.9,, ~, Ti5IT=l",
. tf~-rfi,Jci; riFlndi - 'TI ~
~ -;;n "fflJ:R ~ ~
i.r-3m it" 4if1'-q{&q ~qf.r-,i1 Tfil ii:
~cl-ft~ .'l, ~ ~
~TTffCJl. 1rmfcf.- u:,q ~
1;TU -~ ;:j-;q~-l it fqfuo frf;?:n
-ni ~ ~-ITU in ~m 'cfil fa;tuf.:qa cf;r-1 ~ ~
~ -frwi ~--fl wft:·
lffl 3'.lft.Tf.rr.rq "ffl ~-lH1 172 'cfil "311 mu ( 1) ~~~~~IR
""CfGj ~ * fcf;- <l"R f,$m -q:m ,wt, -;;ft fcrcf;rn ~ii~~ f'IA
w:rT3R ~ @ii ~!ITT! 'cfil TJi t ~
fcf;-m 'llTTf cnl ~ ~. ~
"r:i mu~ t ifi" fu-ct 3l?.lq) -q:m 'Jfi1 7.!T "3UclTT cn1i 'llTTf ~
tu fcn7.J1 Tf7.IT %° il2TT -;;ri ~
if f'I.A fcf;-m !ITT
ii wrn %, ~
~ fu-q o!l4c:1fcta ~
::im-r:J cf>1 "B~ mf~ <fi1 <ft rrt fufura ~
i:rr-t .:llt-lf;p.:rq cf>1 mu 200 ii.~-·~ m" ~~'ITT, ~
.. ~ ~- ~
1fc13TI<ITTWFh1 mu 234 "cf>1 "311-mu ( 2) ii,~ "!TT, f1l--'lf0f1.s1a ~
.. ( 2 )
3TTl' !HG '.q''-TT "fi1 's'T.rn 3TI
~ fcl'fuo um ii m~ ~
~ ~..., -:m ~
3=i'Fcfll ~ ~I -;;nirrn-_"
<}fft.rf.mt:l cfi'r ~mr 234 <n1 "3'G- 't.ITTT ( 3., ifl ~
'Ill, f .. p:::;.if cif@o ~
~, mt;~ if.-~ ii
1Ff ~<f>l mu 234 <bi "J'q-mu ( 3) t-~ f➔J.ifctforn ~
cfiT ~ll TIW-IB ~
lfaGR ffl 91R ~~it 3Pf-l ~
ij -tj-mt-R <ii1: -m-rn.-·
3Il~cfil tmf 257ll, WU:S (qi-1) ifi-"1_d, f.:Hf<:1f@1 ~~
m<JiR 3TI"{ faiim oqfin ~ m. l'-l@ s1 ~ ~ -,.mr c,) ifi ~ltA
fcfim 3TI'ffTT if; :w.ill ij ~
: 7, Sl/sl.  3l,~.fiJ- Tf./13. -'!:ffIB if> "ffiqlffi ~ ~
34S ~ 1:JUs ( 3) if;~ ii~':
% "=iPJ -ii ~
(No. 32 of 2j) D )
THE CHHATT1 GARH LANO REVENUE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2013
n Act Bill further to amend the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of
l:k II errnch.:d h the
hhalll-;garh Legislature in the ixty-fourth Year or the Republic
or India. a, follow!-. :-
I Im, A1.:t 111;1y he 1.:allcd the
hlwursgarh Land Revenue (Amendment) A<.:t.
It ,hal l 1.:ornc into fnrcc
from the date of II\ puhl1ca11on in the Offi ·ial
i\ftt:r l·lau ·e (l1) nf !-.Uh-scuinn (I) of Section 2 of the Cl ab1111"garh Land Revenue
CnJc. 1959 ( o. 20 of 195 Jl (hcrc-in-after referred to a~ tlic l'ri11c1p;1I Ac1 I. th<.: fol low-
111g \hal l he in,crtcJ. name!\ :
"Marl-ct Value" m..:an~ the value of land as~t:~st:J at:cmJ111g to 1hc guideline~
1~~ucd h) the CC1!kt:tm umlcr the Chhatt1~garh Bapr lul)a MargJar),hak
S1ddhanton Ka Banaya Jana Tatha Un ka Punrikshan Niyam. 2000 mad<'.
under the Indian Stamp Ac1. I K99 ( o. 2 of 1899):"
In ,uh-,cdion ( I ) of Scciion . 0 nJ' the Princ1pal Act. the word), "a Tah).ilJ:1r·· shall be
In dau,c (c) ,lr Scct10n 34 ol thc Principa l AL·t. lor the won.I " lift) .. 1h1.: word), "one
thou).a 11J" ,ha! I he .,uh).tl(ult:d.
In , uh-seclion n, or St:Cll\)11 35 ol' the Pri11t 1pal Act. for the word ",1pply"'. the words
"aprly along with affidav11·· ,hall be :;ub,ti tuted.
In ),uh ~e ·tum (I) ot"Seclmn .16 of the Principal Act. for ru n1.:Lu,111C111 lull ~tor
··.". thc rune1uauon colon";" slrnll be ,uh~lilllu.:d
111 ;;uh-).ccl1on ( I J 1)r SeL:tirn1 36 of the Principal /\ct. the l"ol!1llv1ng ,hall he
·'Provided that durmg th· proceedings, ma)(imum !"om ad 1ourn111cnt'-
may be grunted to each p:.irty and each adiournmcnt <,hall he grumcu nnl)
In daU).L' (a) ofS..:ctinn 46 of the Pnnt1pal Act. for the wnnh. f1gurL'). :111d ,ymhol, ··1he
lmli.1n l.1m11a11on /\ct. 1908 ( IX of 1908)" . the word~. ligun.:, anu ') mb,il, "the
L1mi tat1on Act. 196.1 (36 of I 963 )" shall be substitutt!d.
In :-uh-section (2) or Sec11on 52 of the Prin<.:1pal Act. for thc punctuation l'ull
,top .. _.., the punctua11on colon ":'' shall be substituted
In ,ub-~ecuon (2) of Sccllon 52 of the Principal Act. the fc,llow1ng ,hall lw
"Provided that the t:)(ccution or the orJcr :-hall not he \taynl for
11111rc than tlirl'. · n1trnth). at a 11111e or until lhe date nf next henrin;;. wh ichever
. k-rtco 19 3f1T«f 2013
In ,;uh-scclinn n} nfScct1on 52 of the Principal Acl. tor the runc1Ua1ion full
'>lOJl ··:·. the runctuation colon ·: .. :..hall h-: suhstilutcd .
In ,uh-sewon (1) of Section 52 of lht! Principal At·t. the following shall he
.. Provided that execution or !hi! order shall not he stayed for mnrc
than 1hrec monlh!-. at a time or until tht..: date of ncx1 heanng. wlrn:hcver 1s
In Se..:11on 53 of lhe Pnnc11nil Act. for th.: word~. figure:-. .int.I ,ymbol~ "'the lnJ1i.1n
Limitation Act. 1908 (IX of 1908)'' and .. review". 1he word~. figun.:., and !-.ymhob "!ht..:
Limita11on Ac1. 1963 (36 of 1963)" anJ "review and revision" ~hall he suhstitulcd
1-inr Sec.:11on 54 of the Principal Act. tht..: followtn~ ~hall ht..: ~uh~11tu11...J, na1111...ly : -
Notw1thst.imJ111g anything conlaincd 111 I hrs dwp1er. all
n:vis1011, pending b fore any R..:vcnuc ( )fficcr 1mmed1:11dy hcfon: the co111
rng mto rorcc of the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue (A1111...ndment)
ct. }() I ;_
shall be hl!an.l and ckc1dcJ hy such Revenue Onicc1 a~ ii th" Act had 11<11
In ),Uh--, Tlion (2J t,r Section 57 or the Prrncip,li Act. 1'111 tile word, .. Suh
Divi,ion:1' Orfit·er". the word "Colil.:ctor·· .,hall he .,ulN1tuted.
Suh--,cc.:tion (>) and (.c.l ol Section 57 ol 1he Pnnc1pal Ael. shall he dclc1~-d
In sub-!>ection (2-a) of Section 59 of the Principal Ac.:t. for the words ·'Suh D1\·1,1<111;il
Officer", the wnrJs ··competent Authori1y" ..,hall he -.;uh,1i1utcd.
Section 78 or the Principal Act. shall he dclctcd
For sub-section (4) of Section 81 of the Princiral Act. th1: followin~ ),hall hL·
The fair assessment on the land used for non-agrn.:ultural purpo~t..:'>
shall be fixed in accordance wi1h the rules mack under Secllnn 5t1."
Sub- cction (6) of Section 81 of the Pnnc.:iral Act, sha ll he deleted
Section 97 or the Principal Act. shall he dcll!lt:d.
For Section 98 of the Princ.:iral Act. the following shall he suhst11uted. n;:imely :-
Fair assessment.- The fair assessment of land used for agricultural purpn.,cs
·hall be calculated and fixed in aceorJanec with the princirles ;ind rt..:slrn:-
tions set fonh 111 Section 81 and land u-.cJ f11r non-agnc ullurnl purrnst.:), shall
be fixed in accordance with the rult..:s madc under Section 5'·1."
Section 99 of the Principal Act. shall he deleted.
or Section I{)() of the Prin.:ipal Act. the following shall he substituted. namely :-
Fixation of fair assessment at the time of revision.-
In case uf lands. ,yh1eh
are being assessed for a purpose with reference 10 which they were asse~sed
immediately before the revision. tht.: LL~sessmenl so arrived at exceeds. in ca),i:
of agricultural land on!! and half limes lhe land revenue or rcni and in the ca,c
of other lands six Limes the land revenue or rent payabh: immediately hcfort..:
1hc revision Lhr.: ass~,smcnl shall he fixl!d at one and a half times such land
revenue ~r rent in the case of agricultural land and Ill six limes such land
revenue or rent in the cai.c of olhl!r lands:
Provided that. where an improvement has been effected at any time
in any holding held for the purpose of agriculture by or at the expense of the
holder thereof, the assessment of such holding shall be fixed as if the
improvement had not been made."
In sub-section ( l) of ection 119 of the Principal Act, for the word ''twenty-
five", the words "one thousand rupees" shall be sub tituted.
After sub-section (I) of Section 119 of the Principal Act, the following shall
be inserted, namely :-
As required under Section 112, if Registering Officer does not
provide the information prescribed under rules made under Section
110 within one month then Tahsildar may impose fine not exceed-
ing five thousand rupees. which shall be recoverable as arrears of
In sub-section (2) of Section 128 of the Principal Act, for the word "one rupee", the
words "one hundred rupees" hall be substituted.
In section l30 of the Principal Act, for the word "fifty", lhe words "five thousand" shall
In Section 132 of the Principal Act, for the word "one thou and", the words "ten
thousand" shall be substituted.
For Section 133 of the Principal Act, the following shall be substituted. namely :-
Removal of obstruction.- If a Tah ildar finds that any obstacle impedes the
free use of a recognized road, path or common land of a village or impede the
road or source of water which has been lhe subject of a decision under Section
131, he may order the person responsible for such obstacle to remove it and jf
such person fails to comply with the order, he may cause the obstacle to be
removed and may recover from such person the cost of removal thereof and
such person shall be liable, under the written order of Tahsildar stating the
facts and circumstances of the case, to a penalty which may extend to ten
Ln Section 143 of the Principal Act, the word '"ten percent" shall be omitted.
After sub-section (4) of Section 165 of the Principal Act, the following shall be
Notwichstanding anything contained in sub-section (1 ), Bhumiswami
shall not transfer his land held for agriculture 10 any person who is
not a bona.fide agriculturist.
Explanation- For the purpose of this sub-section, the ex.pression
"lransfer'' shall not include the following, namely :-
transfer by way of inheritance;
transfer to legal heirs by way of will;
land acquisition in public interest;
transfer to or for any religious or charitable pur-
pose, for trust, health, culture purpose, educational
transfer to department of State Government and .
Central Government, Units, Corporations and
Companies, which are undertaking of the Govern-
land purcha ed by such person, who became land-
less due to land acquisition in public interest; or
with the permission of the collector, for any per-
son and ro the extent as may be prescribed by the
Government in this behalf.
The State Government may, by notification, makes rules for
carrying out the provisions of thi
For second proviso to sub- ection ( 1) of Section l 72 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely :-
"Provided further that if a Bhumiswami of a land, which is reserved
for a purpose other than agriculture in the development plan but is used for
agriculture, wishes to divert his land or any part thereof to the purpose-for
which it is re erved in the development plan, or land or any part thereof
which is assessed for agricultural purpose and situated in any area other than
an area covered by development plan to the purpose of industry, a written
information of his intention, given by Bhumiswami to the Competent
Authority shall be sufficient and no permission is required for such
Sub-section (6-a) of Section l 72 of the Principal Act shall be deleted.
In Section 200 of the Principal Act, for the words "two hundred" the words "two
thousand" shall be substituted.
In section 227 of the Principal Act, for the word 'twenty", the words "one thousand"
For sub-section (2) of Section 234 of the Principal Act, the following shall be
A draft of the Nistar Patrak shall be published in the village and after
ascertaining the wishes of the Gram Sabha, as prescribed, it shall be
finalised by the Sub-Divisional Officer."
For sub-section (3) of Section 234 of the Principal Act, the following shall be
A copy of the Nistar Patrak so finalised shall be kept in the office of
After sub-section (3) of Section 234 of the Principal Act, the following shall
be added, namely :-
On a resolution passed by the Gram Sabha by a majority of not less
than two third of members present and voting, the Sub-Divisional
Officer with the prior sanction of the Collector and after making
such enquiry, may amend the Nistar Patrak."
In Section 257 of the Principal Act, clause (a) shall be read as clause (a~ l).
In Section 257 of the Principal Act, before clause (a-1), the following new
clause shall be inserted, namely :-
any decision regarding any right under sub-section (1) of Section 57
between the State Government and any person".
''f.wr,m mR t ~
~ ~(~ ~-m)~ w.i-ur
38 fu. ~- fiffir{ ~
23 3P1"@ 2014-~ 1, ~
7370/""it. 141 /21-~/JiW../0. 71./ 14. -
0rrfltit.,Z fcr<4Fi~<fil f'1Hff!f<gH ~~1:11:~ 21-0K-201 J
~ -mn~ clQT ~l~Wjtll{,
uro 16s ,fit tilrltR.
. Z014 qi@IQII .
o,.itw1opt~~. 1959 (lfi. 2uwt_19S9) (\irl~~ ~
M-e: & ) cfi1 Qm I 6 5 if, -
:3'l-Qm (6) ;li ~
(c:t) if,~ F1Till ~"I 'iti ~
" .. , ~
l:ffif<fiNTT( Q l~Nf HI ctiT ~
3lfuf.rm, 2 0 I 3 ( ZO 13 .;fil ti. 30) ~ ~
,fi) ('{i1J_ .,tff ~-"
cti um 241 cti -aq.mn ( 4) if, ~
(1894cfil ~ . l)~ntrr-llR,~,aT<fi~~"~~. ~
~am: 4HC::m111 cti1 ~~ . 2013 (2013 i:fil°ti. 30)" ~%1.n-;;:rm.
(i,o 15 of 2014)
Hll. TTT CARH I.AND REVE
'E CODE (AME. "DMENT) ACT. 2014
An Ac1 fur1her to amend the
hhattisgarh Land Revenue Cod , 1959 (;-.lo. 20 or
13c 11 cnac1ed by the Chhatu ·garh Legdarurc t11 the 1xty-fifth Year of the Republic of
India. as follows :-
!'his /\ct may be called the Chhatll garh Lmd Revenue Code (Amendment)
l t shall come into force from the date of its publication m the
In ewon of 16 o the
hhanisgarh Land Revenue Code. 1959 ('\Jo.
(hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act),·
ln clause (ii) of sub-section (6). for the punctua1ion ull s1op
punc1ua ion colon'·:" hall be suhstirured.
After clause (ii) of sub-section (6), the foll wing shall be msened, namc:ly :-
·'Provided that the provision ofth1s sub-sec11on shall not be applicable
to rhc land acquired under 1he Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (No. 30of2013 )."
In , ec1ion 234 of1hc Principal Act,-
In sub-section (3), for the punctuation full top·'.". the punctuation colon·':"
sha II be substituted.
After .ub- ection (3), the followmg shall be added, namely :-
'·Provided that the provision of thi
ection shall n t apply tn case of
notification of any revenue village as an urban area and adop1ion of a
Jn sub- ection (4) of Sect10n 247 of the Principal Act for lhe word , figure and
parenthese " and Acqui iti~n Act 1894 (1 of 1894)", the word, figures and
parentheses "Right to fair Compensauon and . Transparency in Land Acqus1tion,
Rehabilitation and Re ettlement Act, 20·13 (No. 30 of 2013)" shall be substituted.
~ I 1s ft!'. ~- fm;rrf, f.r-riq;
29. 2015-<ffiRg 9, W-5 1937
3964/~- -a{~./U. ll./15.-~~mrr~, Pt'-l~f&a ~rl~f.1md~m"tR~ 24-04-2015<fil
~<liU, ~Rl a,f:Mmor Ji\~~~~ h~ t
!fm l .;1 .fmtr-1.
U!U 17 l ifil ~mu.J.
UTU 173 "ifil efmtr-r
oiifl«I,; 'k~ti%ffi. J9S9 (s,;_ 20~1959) (;it~~~lJff ~ifi~ilf.nifu
~) ifil um 2 -it"3ll-um (1) ~ ~
.f.i tir-;116 .f.l "3Q-U'm (4) ~ ~
1W' llf4Rlm" ;f.t ~.mi 112 .f.l 3Q -um ( 1) ~ ~
f.u-i R:IR1111 ~:wrfr«r ~
t1, l{_a.:ii (~).<'IE~ m:im "3m1ii 'ifiln°R<fri-it ~
<fil~<l'~ 'lflffi. P.JTTtffi fu::-.:rr;;rr.fl ~
irm . .W.-"3?Ifll fr~~~~~
qq ~., ~ 1n~ ~
'f!ci ~ "~ -"<fi ~
0~ .  * 3ftir-!" t ~. ~
'(2)~;:f;'tnm 1 lifi ~~<lil~'lfiliJiT~. 3tl-trm (I) t ~
sF.Jl'1qi 3964/"it. 144/ 21-3!/Tm-,./'3. -t./15.-1-Tffif~ ~it~
30-04-2 o 1 s q;y ldi!;ji') ~~~~ii"~
-.:m:1 ~ CM 3!1~W:;-E-11'<,
CHHATTI GARH LA rD REYE UE ( MENDMENT) ACT, 2015
An Act further to amend the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (. o. 20 of 1959).
Be ir enacted by the Chhartisgarh Legisla1ure in rhe Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of
India, as follows :-
This Act may be called rhe Chhanisgarh Land Revenue (Amendment)
It shall come into force from the date of its publication in rhe Ofticial Gazette.
After clause (o-a) of sub-section (I) of Section 2 of the Chhartisgarh Land Revenue Code.
1959 (No. 20 of 1959), (hereinafter referred to as the Principal /\ct). the following shall be
·· Urban land·· means land ad ptc l for other use except agriculrure in
master plan!dcvelopmem polic) of the urban areas:·
After clause (ii) of~ecum.l proviso to ub-scction (-1) of Section 165 of the Principal Act.
the following shall be inserted. namely:-
There shall not be funher trnnsfer of land transfcn·ed for industrial
After second provi_o ro sub-section (I) of rction 172 of the Principal Act. the fol1011 ing
shall be insen L namely :-
"Provided furtherthat it shall be compulsory to establish micro, mall and
medium industries within a period of three years and within a period of five years
in case of major industries, front die date of notice of diversion of land diverted for
industrial purposes. If production after establishment of industry docs not start within
a abovementioned specified period rhen diversion sball au1omaticall, be deemed to ha e
Provided also further that the _ tate Government may. for spt:cial reasons ro be
recorded in writing. extend the aid period:·
.·t·c tio n 172.
In Section 173 of the Principal Act-
After word and symbol .. Relinquishmenrs.-" and before the words --subject to
the rules". the figure and parentheses "(I)" shall be inserted.
After sub-seclion (1 ), the following shall be added. namely:-
Relinquishment of diverted land under Section I 72 of the Code may be
made in accordance with sub-sectfon ( I) by giving written information
;;ft, 2-22-i§ffi\-1'1«! lJ'lfc/38 fu. 'it.
~. Wr<lR, fl:;riq; 3 ~
2002-~ 12, 'll'f; 1924
~. fl:;riq; 7 ~
0t1lw1~ fll>IR~'ll "'' f1"1fc.1f<lld "1f~, f;m 'l<:fl:;riq; 3-11-2002 <1>1 <"'<q,"'
"'13lTl!l!=m ~t. ~~"'1~ it~ WnJrndflf;'!i.mn t.
WffiM~ it (l"'lsl<'I it ';jJl'[ 'it o'll ->J,a~llj6R,
1Nfc / 38 fu. it. ~. ~
( alfflti 1(0 I)
5~ 2016-~ 15, ~
" 0dlftI~/~/ 09 /2013-2015."
4432/~- -'-3f/~-/0.1T./16 . -0d'lftI~ Rrur.rnm<f>, f.n-1R-1Rsia ~lfuf.l,:n:rf~m'IR~ 25-o<i-2016qi)
'frnit('fm '311~:/l ljfl R,
qft_ ~- ~. ~
" ( 3-cn) -;;aj Jq -trm ( 1) ~ ~
~ ft;m wit -& ~, -M
. c11fu1~ifimw-R qf<<l1"1-il ~~ fa~ifcha &br~'lfu:Rt!Tlft~i. ~~
~~cfil, ·3q{lcl~H!<ll,_jj;f~~oQqqRfa <h~ ffli1TT, ~
ffli1TT 'J!of ~urn~ 'lfu:R Jq-tITTJ ( 1) ~ ~
Jq-tITTJ (4) ii,~ "mrR &br-tt~ ~"~~~ "~urn ii" '3IB:~
sfillT<f> 4432/"il. 148/2Fdl/TJ:Rc',./~. <1. / 16. -
THE CHHATIISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2016
An Act further to amend the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20
Be it enacted by the Chhattisgarh Legislature in the Sixty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India, as follows:-
This Act may be called the Chhattisgarh
It shall come into force from the date of its publication in the Official
In Section 237 of the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of 1959), -
after sub-section (3), the following shall be inserted, namely:-
Where the land kept for the purposes mentioned under clause (b)
of sub-section (I) is found within the area identified for any industrial,
commercial or mining project, then the collector may divert such land for
the above mentioned purposes, but such diversion can be made only
when equivalent land is provided for the purpose of clause (b) of
sub-section (I) within the same village."
in sub-section ( 4), after the words "alternative land of equivalent area",
the words "in the same village" shall be inserted.
'ffi€lrt€ + s1qri,1 g1-6 gqtr*
srR 5it-dr{ (ftfl er*ft-*-e )+ Asur
ig wgcd. sgis *.2-zz-mtsre
urwa / :a fu. e. ftdrii, ftqis
'tfu/Sr f rssf zott-zots."
trugr, {rkdr, ft{ia lB srfl-{a 2018
fr& sih furqt e.nf frum
EianFEI, rEr+* tr+q, irqt{-{tg{
nttttqg(, frti*. 14 srrr€I2olt
a;qis szrzl$. rsz/zr-orlurs./o.:r./ra. -Edtqcftunat+re1ft6ffi6
+1 rqqra fi eEHft fi R A gfi t, ga-<sra e.&Tr.rRur * qrf,ofi e fr q n-*.rft Ia ft -+ qm i.
BtfiE rc * tr"qqm & crc i aen sni{rEqR,
q-$q gilrn atgn, sTfrfufi qfti
6RTqrT6tlqq{, Iq;IrS 18Wfr€I 2018
siftqrG krsg riBdr (i{ffi{) etrErr?qq, zors
Bdurrq q-true dkm, I e s e (6. 2 0 v1r ese ) o.] efl{ €qr}ea 6ii Eg srfufrqc"
trrra rrunrq t B-d-ffid qd fr 6-dsrc fr trr+qo-ea ERT Frqfr fua sq i qa eft Iffi
-d S : -
Ed€rCt1-uue€R-ar, resg (s. zosltssq)fitrnrz:zfr,sq-trro(r)fr,eu-e(s)i,qq
*qtdn+m"ft qq4-6 q-q " *t fiqrwm atn gtrra *fur nffi fi enqtr + m "
nqrttqg(, frqis 14 sir€I 2018
6'ci{ 82t2ldi. rsz/zr-or/xrs./e. rr./rs.- r+rca * €Bern & er-S€E :as * s,rs (r) & wgwur fr Es ftt{u fi
vrn{qs sTBq"-{r ftqi6 r 4- I - 2 0 I 8 6r eiffi wgan rrwura i; qr8r*.n A gir{dRT v-*rfrta ftqr Hril t.
Bdqrc * usqra + =nc t aQTr stdqrEsR,
(No. 18 of 2018)
THE CHHATTISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE (AMENDMENT)
An Act further to amend the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959
(No. 20 of 1959).
Be it enacted by the Chhattisgarh Legislature in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of
India, as follows :-
This Act may be called the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code
It shall come into force from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
ln Section 231 of the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of
1959),insub-section(l), inclause (d),aflerthewords "forgaothan", the words
" and establishment olGowshala and animal holding premises " shall. be inserted.
qiqrr+, {rul arn Aq{ srurn, enftwm anr qfisfiq gqurdq, {rqgi € gka arn n+rfrn - z o i r
u+srrd {r.d[d, friid 1f,€ 2022
TTIE CHHATTISGARH LAND REVENUE CODE
An Act further to amend the Chhattisgarh Land
Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of 1959)
Be it enacted by the Chhattisgarh Legislature in the
Seventy-Third Year ofthe Republic of India, as follows :-
This Act may be called the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue
Code (Amendment) Act, 2022.
It shall come into force from the date of its publication
in the Official Gazette.
In Section 2 of the Chhattisgarh Land Revenue Code, 1959
(No. 20 of 1959), (hereinafter referred to as the Principal ,A.ct), -
in sub-clause (iii) of clause @) of the sub-section (1),
before the word "orchards", the words and symbol
"commercial plantations," shall be inserted.
in sub-clause (i) of clause (t) of sub-section (l), the
words and figure "by an occupancy tenant
to his Bhumiswami in according to
ol Section 188 or,, shall be
/--rtu/ or suD_sectlon (1). the
"(u),,Revenue Officer,, means the
Revenue Officer mentioned in
(iv) clause (y) of sub-section (1) shall be
(v) after clause (z-5) of sub_section (1), the
following shall be inserted, namely:_
"(z-6) Development plan shall have
the same meaning as defined
in the Chhattisgarh liaga,
Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam,
t9Z3 (No. 23 of 7923).,,
For Section 11 of the principal Act, the,
following shall be substituted, namely:_
"11. Revenue Officers._ There "fr* U"
the following classes of Revenue
(1) Commissioner, Lahd Records;
(2) aaaitionat Commissioner, Land
u-d{qE{-qq*, frcis I r$.zoz
(5) Collector and District Survey
Divisional Officer (Revenue)) and
(11) Tahsildar and Assistant Survey
(12) Additional Tahsildar (Additionat
(l3)Superintenilent of Land Record;
Sub-section (3) of Section 13 of the
Principal Act shall be omitted.
lFor Section 22 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substitqted, namely:-
Ed€lr€ {-dqd, fr{i6 4 F$ 2022
Coliector may make arly one or more
Collectors or Deputy Collec,tors in
charge of ione or more Sub-Divisions
of the district who shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties as
may be prescribed by this Code or
conferred or imposed on a Sub-
Divisional Officer under the Code or
any other enactment for the time
In sub-section (1) of Section 33 of the
Principal Act, for the figure "41,', the figure
"258" shall be substituted.
In Section 4O of the principal Act, the
words ,'in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter" shall be omitted.
of the Principal Act shall be
"44. Appeal and Appellate Authority.-(1)
Save as otherwise - provided, an
For Section 44 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:-
appeal shall lie from every original
order passed urrder this Code or rules
Brdsrrd {qqd, ft{i{ 4 q$ 2022
(a) if such order is passed by a
Revenue Officer sub-ordingte to
the Sub-Divisional Officer, to
(b) if such order is passed by a
Revenue Officer sub-ordinate to
the Deputy Survey Officer, to
the Deputy Survey Officer;
(c) if such order is passed by the
Sub-Divisional Oflicer to the
(d)if such order is passed by the
Deputy Survey Officer to tJ e
(e) if such order is passed by any
Revenue Officer in respect of
whom a direction has been
made under sub-section (3) of
Section 12 or Section 21 to such
Revenue Oflicer as the State
(f) if such order is passed by the
Collector to the Commissioner;
(g) if such order is
(h) if Such order isipassed by the
Conimissioner, Land Records to
the Board of Revenue.
(2) Save as otherwise provided, under
this Code or the rules made
thereunder, second appeal against
every order passed in first appeal
(a) if such order has been passed
by the Sub-Divisional Officer
or the Deputy Survey Oflicer
or the Collector or the District
if such order has been passed
by the Commissioner or the
to the Board of Revenue.
A second appeal shall lie on the
(a) if the original order
matter of cost; or
Bdslrd qrsrd, ft{is 4 q{ 202 2
if tlle order is contrary to 1aw or
usage having the forqe of law'; or
if the order has tailed to
determine some material issue
of law or usage having force of
(d) if there has been a substantial
error or defect in the procedure
as prescribed by this Code,
which may have produced error
or defect in the decision of the
(4) An order passed in review varying
or reversing shall be appealable in
like manner as the original order."
Section 45 of the Principal Act shall be
In sub-section (1) of Section
50 of the Amendment of
(1) for the words "Settlement
occur, the words "Commissioner,
Land Record" shall be substituted.
for the words "Settlement Officer".
wherever they occur, the wprds
Bdsrrs wc*, Fqi* 4 q{ 2022
In clause (i) of proviso of sub-section (1) of
Section 51 of the Principal Act,-
(1) for the words "settlement
occur, the words "Commissioner,
Land Record" shall be substituted.
for the words "Settlement Officer"
wherever they occur, the words
"District Survey Officer" shall be
For the first proviso of sub-section (2) of
Section 59 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely :-
"Provided that, the State Government,
may giye exemption, on mentioned
conditions, upto the limits specified by
Notification, to new micro and small
In Chapter VII of the Principal Act,-
(1) for the Heading "Revenue Survey and
Settlement in Non-Urban Areas", the
words "Land. Survey and Land Revenue
Assessmenrt' shall be substituted.
Bdqird {riqr, E{is a tr$ 2022
(21 for the sub-heading, "A.- Application of
Chapter and Officers tq conduct Revenue
Survey andlor Settlerrrent", the words
"A-Officer? shall be substituted.
Section 61 of the Principal Act shall be
For Section 62 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"62. Appointment of Commissioner of
Government rnay, appoint a
Commissioner of Land Records, who
shall, subject to the directions
issued by the State Government in
this regard, manage and control the
land survey and land records."
In Section 63 of the Principal Act,-
(1) for the words "Additional Settlement
Commissioner", wherever they occrlr,
the words "Additional Commissioner,
Land Records" shall be substituted.
(21 for the words "Settlement
Commissioner", wherever they occllr,
the words "and "Commissioner, Land
Records." shall be substituted.
For Section 64 of the prinbipai Act, the
Offiicer, Deputy Survey Officer and
Assistant Survey Officer._ (1) fn
respect of lands which are subject to
(a) the Collector of t]le district shall
(c) the Sub-Divisional Officer of tfre
-sub_division shall be Deputy
(d) Tahsildar, Additional Tahsitdar
or Naib Tahsildar shall be
Assistant Survey Oflicer within
(2) All District Surve_y Officers shatl
' Commissioner of Land Records.
sdqrrq {rsrd, Aii{ 4 q$ 2022
All the De$uty Survey Officers and
Assistant Survey Officers in the
distric-Q shall be sub-ordinate to
the District Survey Officer.
(4) All the Assistant Survey Officers
in the sub-division shall be sub-
ordinate to the Deputy Survey
For Section 65 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"65. Powers of District Survey Olficer,
Deputy Surrzey Officer and
Assistant Sunrey Officer.- (1) The
Power of the Collector, Sub-
divisional Officer or Tahsildar
under this code in respect of the
land subjected to land survey shall
vest in District Survey Officer,
Deputy Survey Officer or Assistant
(2) The State Government may vest,
in the Deputy Survey Officer or
Assistant Survey Officer, all or any
of the powers of ,the District sulvey
s*rpr6 rrd{d, ftris 4 q{ 2022
In Chapter VII of the Principal Act, for the
sub-heading, "8.- Revenue Srlrvey", the
words "B-Land Survey" shall be
For Section 66 of the Principal Act, the
following shal1 be substituted, narnely:-
' "66. Definition of Land Survey.- "Land
survey' means any or more or all of
the following activities, namely:-
(1) The division of land into survey
and re-organization of the existing
survey numbers/plot numbers, or
creation of new survey numbers/
(2)Preparation of a map of the land
or to revise or improve it, as the.
(3) Preparation of record of rights;
(4)Preparation of field book
containing each survey number/
plot number, as the case may be;
(S)Preparation -of any other record,
as may be prescribed."
For Section 67 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, uamely:-
g*qq6 {rdqd, Q:{is 4 {$ 2022
"67. Notification of proposed land
surveyr.- (1) The District Survey
Officer may commence land survey
in the whole or any area of:his
charge by publishing a notification
to that effect in the Official Gazette.
(2) The lands notified under sub-
section (1) shall, from the date of
the said notification, be deemed to
be subject to land survey until a
termination of such land survey is
issued by the District Survey
(3)There shall be a land survey by the
District Survey Offrcer in the
following circumstances : -
(a) on the direction of the State
(b) on the completion of 30 years
(c) if the reference map is
District , Survey Officer
BdqrB n-qq{, friifi 4 xf, 2022
In Section 68 of the principal Act,_
(21 for the words
In Section 69 of the
Survey Officer" shall be
For Section 70 of the principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:_
"7O. Power to re-number or sub_divide
or amalgamate suruey numbers._
(I) The District Survey Oflicer may,
with a view to acquisition of rights
in the land or for any other reason,
renumber the survey numbers and
divide them into as many pa_rts, as
may be required, ald amalgamate
more than one survey number into
a single survey number.
(2) Division of any
Bde.r6 {rsqd, f{is 4 q{ 202 2
accordance with the rules made
. iunder this Code.
(3) Whenever the survey numbers
are renumbered, the District
Survey Officer shall rectify the
entries in all the records prepared
or maintained under this Code."
In Section 72 of the Principal Act, for the
words "Settlement Oflicer", the words
"District Survey Officer" shall be
In Section 73 of the Principal Act, for the
words "Settlement Officer" wherever they
occur, the words "District Survey Officer"
In Section 74 of the Principal Act, for the
words "revenue sllrvey", the words "land
survey" shall be substituted.
In Chapter VII of the Principal Act, for the
sub-headinE, "C.- Settlement of rent", the
words 'C-Land Revenue Assessment" sha]l
Section 76 of the Principal Act shall be
For sub-section (1) and (2)
"77. Fixation of ass()ssment rates._ (l)
The :District Survey Officer shall
assess the land revenue for each
survey number/ plot number or their
parts as per the rate fixed by the
(2) Where a holding is made up of
many survey numbers/plot numbers,
District Survey Officer shall fix
applicable land revenue separately
for each survey number/plot
Section 79 of the principal Act shall be
In Section 80 of the principal Act,_
(1) for the words "Settlement Officer", the
words "District Survey Officer" shall be
{2) for the words "Settlement", the words
"land revenue assessment,, shall be
of the Principat Act,
of Section 77 of ..
"a2. Land revenue assessment to be
effective.- When the assessmenr of
land revenue of any land is done in
accordance with Section 77 and 81,
such asse$sment shall take effect
from the next revenue year, and the
assessment so made, until it is
changed in accordance with this
Code or any other law, shall remain
Section 83 of the Principal Act shall be
In Section 84 of the Principal Act, for the
word "settlement', the words uland revenue
assessment" shall be substituted.
For Section 85 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"S5.Term of assessment of land
revenue.- (1) The term of
assessment made by the District
Survey Officer shall, ordinarily, be
' of 30 yea-rs.
(21 In special circumstances,
speci$ring the reason, the State
Government, may give directions to
the District Survey Oflicer to
change the assessment of land
revenue for the whole area or for a
Ed{rrrd rrdrd, Snis 4 qf 2022
particular area e.ven before 30
years, but such instructions can
not be given before' 15 years of
assessment of land revenue.
(3) After the expiry of the term of
assessment made on any land, the
sub-divisional officer shall have the
jurisdiction to revise the land
revenue of t]lat land.
(a) Notwithstanding that the term
of assessment of land revenue in a
particular area has expired, if a
new assessment has not been
made in respect of that, it shall be
deemed that the rate of land
revenue shall remain the same till
the upcoming land revenue
Section 86 and 87 of the Principal Act shall
In Section 88 of the Principal Act,-
(1) for the words "Settlement Of{icer"
wherever they occur, the word
"District Survey Officer" shall be
(2) for the word.s
Bdglrq {rdrd, fr{ia 4 q{ 2022
In Section 89 of the Principal Act,-
( 1) for the rvords "revenue s,
words "land surwey" shall be
(21 for the word "settlement", the words
"larrd revenue assessment" shall be
For Section 91 and 91-A of the Principal
Act, the following shall be substituted,
"91, Powers of Tahsildar after the land
survey is ovef.- After the land
survey is over, the powers of the
District Survey Officer under Section
69 and 70 shall be \rith the
91-A. Power to make rules.- The State
Government may make rules to'
regulafe generally the conduct of a
For Section 90 of the Principal Act, the Amendment of
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"9O. Powers of the Collector after the
completion of the land survey.-
The powers of the District Survey
Oflicer under Section 68, 72, 73,
and 77 shall be with the Collector,
after the completion of the land
assessment under this Cohe.,,
In clause (ii) of the Explanation to sub_
sectipn (2) of Section 92 of the principal
Act, 'for the word "settlement,,, the words
"land revenue assessment', shall be
In proviso of sub-section (2) of Section 94
of the Principal Act, for the word
"settlement", the words ,'land revenue
assessment" shall be substituted.
In Section 101 of the principal Act, for the
word "settlement" wherever they occur, the
words "land revenue assessment" shall be
In Section 107 of the principal Act,-
(1) for the words ',field map", wherever
they occur, the words "map of the
land" shall be substituted.
(2) in sub-section (5), for the words
"Settlement Officer,,, the words
"District Survey Officer" shall be
(3) in sub-section 15), for the words
"revenue survey,,, the words "land
survey" shall be substituted
In Section 1O8 of the Principal Act,-
(f t 1rr sub-section (1), {,". the *oti
"village", the words "and urban area"
(2) in clause (b) of sub-section (i), the
words "occupancy tenants and" sha,ll be
(3) in sub-section (2), for the words
"revenue survey", the words "land
survey" shall be substituted.
For Section 110 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:-
,'110. Mutation of acquisltion of right
in land records.- (1) The Patwari
shall record every acquisition of
right which has been reported to
him under Section 109 or which
comes to his notice on information
received through online medium
or any other source, in the online
(2) All such reports relating to the
acquisition of right, as the case
may be, received by the Patwari
under sub-section (1), shall be
sent to ,the Tahsildar within
piescribed time period by th:
State Goyernment in such manner
and in 'such form as may be
(3i On receipt of intimation under
Section 1O9 or on receipt of
intimation of acquisition of such
rights through online medium or
from any other source, the
Tahsildar within prescribed time
(a) initiate the process of mutation
in the online e-Namantaran
(b)issue notice to a1l the interested
(c) publish the public notice or
advertisement on the official
notice boaird, at the designated
(a) On receipt of objection in any
case or if the Tahsildar finds the
matter to be disputed for any
reason, he shall register the case
by transferring it to his e-revenue
Namantaran portal, otherwise a-11
the proceedings in the case wiil be
done thr6ugh the online e-
(5) The Tahsildar shall, after giving
the interested persons a reasonable
opportunit5r of being heard and
after making such further inquiry
as he may deem necessa-ry, pass
orders relating to the mutation and
shall make necessarJr entries in
such other relevant land. record.s
including the khasra and map of
tJ:e village, as the case may be. The
patwari shall veri$r the records by
correcting them within prescribed
time period, after which the
Tahsildar shall file the case.
contained in Section 35, no case
under this Section shall be
dismissed in the absence of any
party and shall be disposed of in
(7) On the basis of registered
document, after publication of
advertisement and service of
information to the concerned
Bd€rrq {rdrd, e{is { {$ 2022
rRulation on any land., q.ppropriate
orders will be passed on the basis
of the document in case of any
objection are not received or
absence of the parties.
(S) All proceedings under this
Section, shall be completed within
prescribed time period. In the case,
where the cases are not disposed
off within the specified period, the
Tahsildar shall report the
information of pending cases to the
Collector in such form and manner
as may be 1
For Section 114 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"114. Land Records.- The following land
records shall be prepared for each
village and urban areas, namely:-
(a) the map of the village/ urban
area, the map of the Abadi
and the map of the land under
(b) record of rights under Section
(c) B- 1 jkha sraf nazu1 maintenance
khasra or field book in such
form as may be prescribed,
(d) Kisan Kitab under Section 114-
(e) the details of all unoccupied
land under Section 233,
(f) Nistar Patrak under Section
(g) Wajib-ul-Arz, lf alry, under
(h) register related to boundar5r
(i) the details of the diverted land,
0) the Encroachment Register,
(k) any other record as may be
For Section 115 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely :-
"115. Correction of wrong or incorrect
entry in land record.- (1) Sub-
divisional Officer may, on his own
motion or on application of an
aggrieved person, after making
such enqulry as he deems fit,
c-orrect any wrong or incorrect
E-*srr6 {s[d, ft{i{ 4 q{ 202 2
in the land redords.prepared
Section 114 other than:
Kitab and record of rights,
such corrections shall be
Provided that no action shall
be initiated for correction of anY
entry pertaining to a period prior to
five years without the sanction in
writing of the Collector.
(2)No order shall be Passed under
(a) getting a written rePort from
the Tahsildar concerned ; and
(b) grving an oPPortunitY of
Provided that where interest
of Government is involved, the Sub-
Divisional Officer shall submit the
case to the Collector.
(3)On receipt of a case under sub-
section (2), the Collector shall make
such enquiry and Pass such order
as the deems lit."
Section 116 of the Principal Act shall be
For Section 124 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:-
u+{rr6 {rdqd, e{is 4{{ 2022
"l24.Construction of boundary marks.-(1)
Thei boundaries of a-11 villages and
urban areas shall be fixed and
dema-rcated by permanent boundarlr
(2) The State Government may, by
boundaries of all survey numbers or
plot numbers should also be fixed
and demarcated by boundar5r marks."
Section 125 of the Principal Act, after
words "villages,", wherever they occur,
words "urban areas," shall be inserted.
For sub-section (3) of Section 135 of the
Principal Act, the following shall be
"(3) The compensation payable in respect
of such land shall be in accordance
with the Right to Fair Compensation
and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
r Rehabilitation and Resettlement AOt,
2013 (I{o.30 of 2013)."
In Section 134 of the Principal Act, for the Amendment of
words "five hundred rrrpees", the word"" Section 134'
"five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
In Section 161 of the Prinaipal Act, for the
rwords "settlement'j, wherever'they' qccur,
'the words "1and revenue assessment" rshall
In Section 165 of the Principal Act,-
(1) In sub-section (1), before the word and
_ figure "Section 168", the words and
figures "Section 158 and" shall be
(2) Sub-section (4-A) shall be omitted.
After sub-section (5) of Section 168 of the
Principal Act, tJre following shall be added,
"(6) Against persons found guilty of
contravention of Section 168, the
Sub-Divisional Officer, as he thinks
fit, may impose a fine not exceeding
Twenty Five Thousand rupees per
In clause (b) of sub-section (3) of Section
170-8 of the Principal Act, for the words
and figures "Land Acquisition Act, 1894
(No. 1 of 1894)", the words and figures
"Right to Compensation and Transparency
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement,Act, 2013 (No. 30 of 2Ol3)'
in sub-section (4) of Section 172 of tt e Amendment of
Pri4cipal Act, for the words "one thousald section 172'
rupbes", the words "ten thousand rupees"
.' shall be substituted
After Sectioh tZS-e of the Principal Act, the Insertion of New
following shall be inserted, namely:-
"178-B.Disposal of applications received
for partition of holding.- (1) The
Tahsildar shall issue notice to the
interested parties and publish
public notice or advertisement by
first entering the applications
received for partition in the e-
(2) On receipt of objection in any
case or if the Tahsildar finds the
matter to be disputed for any
reason, he shall register the case
by transferring it to his e-revenue
court from the online e-
Namantaran portal, otherwise all
the proceedings in the case will be
done through the online e-
(3) On receipt of an application
under this Section by any means,
the Tahsildar shall, within
(a) initiate the process ot
mutation in the online e-
.,(b) issue notice tb aI the
(c) publish the public; notice or
advertisement on the official
designated place in the
on the departmental web
(a) The Tahsildar shaIl, after giving
the interested persons a
reasonable opportunity of being
heard and after making such
further inquiry as he may deem
necessary, pass orders relating
to the partition ald shall make
necessary, entries in such other
relevant land records including
the khasra and map of the
village, as the case may be. The
patwari shall verifii the records
by correcting them within
prescribed time period, after
which the Tahsildar shall file
(5) All proceedings under this'
Section, --shall be completed
within prescribed time period.
In the case, where thg cases
are not disposed off within the
specified p<:riod, the Tahsildar
shallireport the information of
pending cases to the Collector
in such form and manner as
Section 184 of the Principal Act shall be
In the Principal Act, "Chapter XIV :
Occupancy Tenants" and Sections relating
thereto 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191,
192, 193, 194, 195, 196, r97, 198, 199,
2OO,2Ol and2O2 shall be omitted.
In Section 2O3 of the Principal Act, for the
words "settlement",' the words "land
revenue assessment" shall be substituted.
In Section 2lO of the Principal Act, for the
words "Settlement Commissioner", the
words "Commissioner, Land Records" shall
(3) of Section 222 of the
In Section 229 of the Principal Act, for the
words "a Gram Panchayat: or wherb a Gram
Panchayat has not beenlconstiluted, to a
Gram Sabher constituted in accordance
with the provisions of section 232", the
word 'lother" shall be substituted.
Section 232 of the Principal Act shall be
In Section 233 of the Principal Act,-
(1) after the word "village", the words "and
urban area" shall be inserted.
(21 alter clause (a), the following shall be
'(b) it shall not make any entry
inconsistent with the purPoses
prescribed in the notified
development plan, if any."
For sub-section (4) of Section 234 of t}re
Principal Act, the following shall tJre
'(4) On a resolution passed by the Gram
Sabha, as provisioned in the Chhattisgarh
Panchayat Raj Adhiniyam, 1993 (No. 1 of
1994), the Sub-divisional Officer with the
prior sanction of the Collector and after
making necessar5r enquiry may amend the
In Section 241 of the Principal Act,-
(11 in sub-lection (+), foi the word
"Col1ector", wherever they occur, the
(Revenuel" shall be substituted.
(2) in sub-section (5), after the words "or
domestic purposes", the words and
figures "up to a maximum limit of 02
cubic meters in a calendar year" shall
In Section 243 oI the Principal Act, for the
words and figures "the Land Acquisition
Act, L894 (l of 1894)", the words and
figures "the Right to Fair Compensation
and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013
(No. 30 of 2013)" shall be substituted.
For Section 246 of the Principal Act, the
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"246. Right of persons holding house
site in Abadi.- Every person who,
immediately before the coming into
force of the Chhattisgarh Land
Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of
1959), lardully holds any land under
Abadi or hereafter lawfully acquire.
rsuch land shall be the.Bhumiswami
in respect of such land. The
occupier shall be the Bhumiswami
in resp-ect of iana inentioned in lanil
ownership certificate given under
any law/rule by the State
Government to tl'e occupier of the
land as a house site in abadi or in
In Section 250 of the Principal Act,-
(1) in sub-section (1), the words
"occupancy tenant and" shall be
(21 clause (a) and (b) of sub-section (1-a)
(3) in sub-section (3), the words
!'occupemcy. tenant or" shall be
Section 252, 254 and 255 of the Principal
Act shall be omitted.
In Section 257 ofthe Principal Act,-
(1) for clause (b), the following shall be
"(b) any question as to the validity
or effect of a notification of land
, survey or to the term of land
Bdsrrq {rqq{, fr{iq 4 {$ 2022
(2) in clause (c), for the words "Settlement
Officer", the "Dist5ict Survey Officer'i
(3) clause (,n), (o), (p), (qJ, (r), (s), (t), (u) and
(z-1) shall bd omitted'
In sub-section (2) of Section 258 of the
(1) after clause (i), the following shall be
"(i-a) prescribing the form for the
proposal under Section 13;"
(21 atter clause (iv), the following shall be
(3) in clause (rril, before the words
"division of survey numbers", the
words "amalgamation and" shall be
(4) clause (xi) shall be omitted.
(5) in clause (xii), for the words "revenue
survey or settlement", the words "land
survey or land revenue assessment"
(6) after sub-ctrause (b) of clause (xxiv),
the following shall be inserted,
Bdqrr€{rdq{, ft{is 4 q{ 2022
"(c) regulation of procedure and fort'n
repert of acquisition of rights,
intimation, sketch prior to
mutation, receipt, notice, cr)py,
fees, information of pending
cases and other related
documents, for the purpose of
Section 109 and 110; "
after clause (>orviii), the following shall
'(xxviii-a) the manner of summarily
(8) in clause (x>aryi), for the words
"settlement", the words "land revenue
assessment" shall be substituted.
(9) after clause poon/i), the following shall
'Foafirii) Procedure to be followed
(10) after clause (xliv), the following shall
'(xliv-a) regulation of the partition
of land during the lifetime
of a Bhumiswami under
ejectment under Section 126;"
(11) after clause (xlv), the following shall
notices and other processes l
by post or in anY other
manner either generallY or
in any specified areas and
proof of such service;
(b) the regulation of the Power
of revenue oflicers to
witnesses and the grant of
(c) the regulation of recognized
agents with regard to
and acts done by them in
(d) the procedure to be observed
rn effecting attachment of
(e) the procedure for publishing,
and confirming sales and all
u*srr€ {qcd, fr{im l q$ zozz
ddlRTrr€{s l:I,llFnft 4{E 2022
(f) the maintenance and custody,
while under attachment, of
livestock and other movable
property, the fees payable
for such maintenange and
custody, the sale of such
livestock and properff and
t-he proceeds of such sale;
(g) the consolidation of appeals
(h) all forms, registers, books,
entries and accounts which
may be necessarJr or
desirable for the transaction
of the business of Revenue
(i) the time within which, in the
fi) the costs of, and incidental
(k) the examination of witnesses
ffiIrqqqq", fu{i{ 1f,{ 2022
the licensing of petition
writers and the regulation of
(I2l clause (xlvii), (xlviii), (xlviii-A), (xiix),
(l), (1i) and (lvi) shall be omitted.
(13) after clause (txv), the following shall
'(brv-a) regulation to give effect to
the provisions of Section
clause (lxvii) and (trviii) shall be























fof/k vkSj fo/kk;h dk;Z foHkkx
ea=ky;] egkunh Hkou] uok jk;iqj vVy uxj
uok jk;iqj vVy uxj] fnukad 3 ekpZ 2025
Ø- 2087@Mh- 26@21&v@izk:-@N-x-@25-— NRrhlx<+ fo/kku lHkk dk fuEufyf[kr vf/kfu;e] ftl
ij fnukad 14&01&2025 dks jkT;iky dh vuqefr izkIr gks pqdh gSa] ,rn~}kjk loZlk/kkj.k dh tkudkjh ds fy,
izdkf'kr fd;k tkrk gSA
NRrhlx<+ ds jkT;iky ds uke ls rFkk vkns'kkuqlkj]





