Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 – An Overview
P. Rahul Ambedkar B.A. LL.B (Hons),
Principal Civil Judge (Junior Division), Dhone.
Almost one fourth of India’s population is in the age group of 0-14 years and
our country has one of the world’s largest population of children estimated at 444
million children. The Constitution of India under Directive Principles of State Policy
vide Article 39 (f) mandates states to formulate policies to ensure that children are
given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of
freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation
and  against  moral  and   material  abandonment.  Our  Constitution  also  provides
protection for children from being abused or forced by economic necessity to enter
occupations unsuited to their age or strength. Despite the safeguards provided by the
Constitution, children remain a vulnerable populace in our country and are victims of
several  crimes  committed  against  them.  Crimes  against  children,  especially  the
crimes of sexual nature have adverse impact on the victim child and leaves them with
BACKGROUND OF PENAL LAWS IN INDIA DEALING WITH CHILD
With each passing year, crimes against children are on a steep rise and until 2012, we
did not have a law dedicated to address crimes against children, especially ones of
sexual nature. Prior to 2012, Goa Children’s Act, 2003 and Rules, 2004 ans sections
354, 375, 377 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 were the only provisions dealing with any
offences committed against children. Even though United Nations had adopted the
Convention on the Rights of Child in 1989, India did not have any specific law
addressing the offences against children until the enactment of Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter POCSO Act). The provisions under  Goa
Children’s Act, 2003 and Rules, 2004 ans sections 354, 375, 377 of Indian Penal
Code, 1860 did not protect male child and ‘modesty’ and ‘unnatural offence’ were not
defined under Indian Penal Code which made it difficult to apply these laws in
offences committed against children. To curb the growing cases of child sexual abuse
in our country, POCSO Act was enacted in the year 2012 and it came into force on
THE EXTENT OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE IN INDIA:
“The National Crime Records Bureau (2016) findings made it abundantly
evident that child rape was involved in 36,022 (34.4%) of the cases recorded under
the  Protection  of  Children  from  Sexual  Offenses  Act  of  2012.  The  highest
percentages of child abuse instances (15.3%, 13.6%, and 13.1%, respectively) were
reported in Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Madhya Pradesh. According to a recent
study on the frequency of sexual abuse among adolescents in Kerala, 36% of males
and 35% of girls had suffered sexual abuse at some point in their lives. Shocking
findings from a comparable survey undertaken by the Government of India on 17,220
children and adolescents to determine the prevalence of sexual abuse indicated that
every second child in the country was sexually molested; among them, 52.94% were
boys  and  47.06%  were  girls.  Assam  reported  the  most  cases  of  sexual  abuse
(57.27%), followed by Delhi (41%), Andhra Pradesh (33.87%), and Bihar (33.27%).1
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012:
POCSO Act is a gender neutral legislation providing for the welfare and safety
of children irrespective of their gender. As per section 2(d) of POCSO Act, a child is
any person who is below eighteen years of age. A victim under the Act can be a male
or female child. The Act does not create any distinction between the victim or the
perpetrators on the basis of their gender. There are instances when women are
convicted under this Act for child sexual abuse.
The POCSO Act is a comprehensive legislation containing 9 chapters dealing with
the offences, punishment and procedure. There are three broad categories of sexual
offences under POCSO Act:
1. Sexual Assault - (i) Penetrative sexual assault (sections 3 and 4) ,
(ii) Aggravated Penetrative sexual assault (sections 5 and 6)
2. Sexual Harassment (sections 11 and 12)
3. Using child for pornography (section 13)
Section 7 of POCSO Act defines sexual assault as,  “Whoever, with sexual intent,
touches the vagina, penis, anus or breast of the child or makes the child touch the
vagina, penis, anus or breast of such person or any other person, or does any other
act with sexual intent which involves physical contact without penetration is said to
commit sexual assault”. Touching the private parts (genitals and breast) of a child or
making the child touch the private parts of another person with sexual intent without
penetration is sexual assault. Punishment for sexual assault as per Section 8 is
imprisonment for a term not less 3 years but may extend upto 5 years and fine.
Sexual assaults on a child by a police officer within the vicinity of a police station, by
armed forces within the limits of their area, by a public servant, by the staff of jails,
hospitals or educational institutions are considered aggravated sexual assaults. As per
section 10, punishment for aggravated sexual assault is imprisonment for a period not
less than 5 years but may extend upto 7 years and fine.
Section 3 of POCSO Act deals with penetrative sexual assault. As per section
3, A person is said to commit “penetrative sexual assault” if—
(a) he penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a
makes the child to do so with him or any other person; or
(b) he inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into
the urethra or anus of the child or makes the child to do so with him or any other
(c) he manipulates any part of the body of the child so as to cause penetration into
urethra, anus or any part of body of the child or makes the child to do so with him or
(d) he applies his mouth to the penis, vagina, anus, urethra of the child or makes the
child to do so
to such person or any other person.
As per Section 4, punishment for penetrative sexual assault is imprisonment for a
period not less than 10 years but may extend to life and fine; and in cases of
penetrative sexual assault on a child below the age of 16 years, punishment is
imprisonment for a period not less than 20 and may extend upto imprisonment for life
which means the remainder of natural life of that person and fine. Fine imposed under
this section must be reasonable and it must be paid to the victim to meet media
AGGRAVATED PENETRATIVE SEXUAL ASSAULT:
Section 5 of POCSO Act lays down the cases in which penetrative sexual assault
amounts to aggravated penetrative sexual assault. Penetrative sexual assaults on a
child by a police officer within the vicinity of a police station, by armed forces within
the limits of their area, by a public servant, by the staff of jails, hospitals or
educational institutions are considered aggravated penetrative sexual assault and are
punishable under Section 6 of the POCSO Act. As per section 6, punishment for
aggravated penetrative sexual assault is rigorous imprisonment for a period not less
than 20 years which may extend to life, which means the remainder of that person’s
natural life and fine or death. 2019 amendment to section 6 has made the punishment
for this offence more stringent.
Section 11 of POCSO Act defines sexual harassment.  It includes six cases which
constitute sexual harassment of a child.2
1. First, if anyone utters any word or makes any sound or exhibits any object with sexual intent
2. Second, if anyone makes a child exhibits his body so that it is seen by the offender or any
3. Third, if any person shows any child any form or media for pornographic purposes.
4. Fourth, if anyone constantly watches or stalks a child directly or online.
5. Fifth, if anyone threatens to use a real or fabricated depiction of any part of the body of the
child or the involvement of the child in a sexual act through electronic, film or digital.
6. Sixth, if anyone entices a child for pornographic purposes.
As per section 12 of the POCSO Act, punishment for sexual harassment of a child is
imprisonment for period which may extend upto 3 years and fine.
USING CHILD FOR PORNOGRAPHY:
Section 13 of POCSO Act states that  anyone who uses a child for pornographic
purposes by either representing the sexual organs of the child or using a child in real
or  simulated  sexual  acts  or  representing  a  child  indecently  or  obscenely  in
programmes or advertisements on television or on internet, commits the offence
under this section and is liable in accordance with Sections 14 and 15 of the POCSO
Act.3 Punishment under section 14 is imprisonment for a period not less than 5 years
and fine and in case of second or subsequent conviction, period of imprisonment shall
not be less than 7 years and fine. Punishment under section 15 for storing or
possessing  of  pornographic  material  involving  child  is  fine  not  less  than  five
thousand rupees and in case of second or subsequent offence, fine shall not be less
than ten thousand rupees. Punishment for storing or possessing pornographic material
in any form  involving a child for transmitting or propagating or  displaying or
distributing in  any  manner  at  any  time  except  for  the  purpose  of  reporting is
imprisonment for a period which may extend upto 3 years or with fine or with both.
Punishment for storing or possessing pornographic material  in any form involving a
child  for  commercial  purpose  shall  be  punished  on  the  first  conviction  with
imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than 3 years which may
extend to 5 years, or with fine, or with both and in the event of second or subsequent
conviction, with imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than 5
years which may extend to 7 years and shall also be liable to fine.
ABETMENT OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE:
“Section 16 of POCSO Act defines the abetment of the offence. The following acts
constitute abetment of offence under the POCSO Act:
Instigating any person to commit that offence;
Engaging in any conspiracy with one or more persons to commit any offence when any
illegal act or omission takes place in consequence of that conspiracy;
Aiding to commit that offence intentionally.
The punishment for the abetment of offence is specified under  Section 17 of the
POCSO Act, 2012 according to which a person who abets the commission of an
offence and the offence is executed is to be punished with the punishment that has
been provided for that offence under the POCSO Act.”4
ATTEMPT TO CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE:
Section 18 enunciates that attempt to commit any offence under the POCSO Act,
2012 is also an offence inviting either of the two following punishments:5
Imprisonment provided for that offence for a term extending upto one-half of the
imprisonment for life, with or without fine;
Imprisonment provided for that offence for a term extending upto one-half of the longest
term of imprisonment with or without fine.
TRIAL OF CASES UNDER POCSO ACT:
Chapter VII of the POCSO Act provides for establishment of special courts in each
district for trial of offences under this Act. Section 28 provides for designation of a
sessions court as a special court in each district for speedy trial of offences under this
Act by the State Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.
This section also confers jurisdiction on special courts o try offences under section
67B of that Act in so far as it relates to publication or transmission of sexually
explicit material depicting children in any act,or conduct or manner or facilitates
abuse of children online.
TIMELINES UNDER POCSO ACT:
Section 35 of POCSO Act lays down the following timelines:
1. Recording evidence of the child: 3o days from the date of taking cognizance of the
2. Completion of trial: 1 year from the  date of taking cognizance of the offence.
“In the case of Shubham Vilas Tayade vs. State of Maharashtra (Crl.W.P. No. 68 of
2018, dt. 31-01-2018), the Special Court allowed the prosecution for recording
evidence after 30 days of taking cognizance. This order was challenged by the
accused, being violative of Section 35 of the POCSO Act. However, the  Hon’ble
High Court of Bombay  agreed with the counterargument of the APP that as the
accused did not challenge the application of the prosecution so he cannot challenge
the order. Furthermore, it was observed that even otherwise, the Special Court can
record evidence after 30 days and the only rider provided by Section 35 is that the
reasons for the delay have to be recorded.”6
It is essential that the medical examination of a child is conducted with utmost care
and precaution. Rule 5(3) of the POCSO Rules, 2012 makes the provision that no
medical facility or practitioner who renders emergency medical care to a child should
ask for any kind of legal or other documentation before providing such care. Apart
from this, Section 27 of the POCSO Act lays down certain laws regarding the conduct
of medical examinations. These are as follows:7
The medical examination has to be conducted in accordance with Section 164A of the
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
A medical examination of a girl is to be conducted by a woman practitioner.
It should be conducted in the presence of a person in whom the child has trust, for example,
his/ her parents, otherwise in the presence of a woman nominated by the head of the medical
CHILD FRIENDLY INVESTIGATION AND TRIAL:
Sections 24, 26 and 33 of the POCSO Act lay down the procedure of investigation
and trial which has been formulated keeping in mind the needs of a child. The
following points are taken into consideration while investigating any crime under
i. The statement of the child is to be recorded at his/ her place of residence and generally by a
ii. The officer who is to record the statement of the child should not be wearing a uniform.
iii. The officer should ensure that the child does not come in contact with the accused during the
iv. A child is not to be detained in the police station at night.
v. The officer should ensure that the identity of the child is not revealed.
vi. The statement of the child is to be recorded in the presence of a person in whom the child has
trust, for example, their parents.
vii. The statement of the child is to be recorded via audio-video electronic means.
viii. The assistance of the translators or interpreters should be taken wherever necessary.
ix. Frequent breaks are to be allowed during the trial.
x. The special court has to ensure that the child is not called to repeatedly testify in the trial court.
xi. Aggressive questioning of the child is not permitted during the trial.
The theory of last seen is applied in the child sexual abuse trials. According to this
theory, the person who is last seen with the victim is assumed to be the perpetrator of
the offence when the time gap between the point when they were last seen alive is so
minute that it is not possible that any other person could have committed the crime.9
However, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Shyamal Ghosh vs. State of West Bengal
reported in AIR 2012 SC 3539 held that it is not reasonable for the courts to apply
last seen theory when the time gap is large.
PRESUMPTIONS UNDER POCSO ACT:
Sections 29 and 30 of the POCSO Act are ‘reverse onus’ provisions, i.e., a provision
wherein the burden of proving the element of a crime is placed on the accused
person. This is a departure from the golden rule prescribing the State to prove all the
elements of a crime beyond reasonable doubt. According to section 29, when an
accused is ‘prosecuted’ for certain offences under the POCSO Act, it is obligatory for
the court to presume that he/she has committed, or abetted or attempted to commit the
offence for  which he/she is prosecuted. Section 30 deals with ‘presumption of
culpable mental state’. Section 30 makes it obligatory on a judge to presume the
existence of required culpable mental state of the accused.10
“Section 30(1) states that, the Special Court ‘shall presume’ the existence of culpable
mental state of the accused. The expression ‘shall presume’ under section 30(1)
makes it ‘obligatory’ for a judge to presume the required ‘culpable mental state’.1 For
example, the ‘required culpable mental state’ under sections 7 and 11 of the POCSO
Act is ‘sexual intention’. It means in any prosecution for an offence under section 7
or 11 the Court has to presume ‘sexual intention’ on the part of the accused. And in
case of any other offence, the Court has to presume the mens rea required for that
particular offence. Section 30 further states that: “it shall be a defense for the accused
to prove the fact that he had no such mental state with respect to the act charged as an
offence  in  that  prosecution.”  It  means,  the  presumption  under  section  30(1)  is
rebuttable. The expression “mental  state with respect  to the act  charged as an
offence” is important. It speaks about ‘specific mental state’ which is ‘required’ for
constituting an offence charged against the accused. It means, the Court has to
presume only that mental state which is required by the definition of the offence
charged. The definition of the offence charged, therefore, is a sufficient guide for a
judge to ascertain as to what kind of culpable mental state is required; and there was
no need to incorporate separate explanation for the same. Explanation to section 30,
therefore, is not only needless; but also that it misguides the Court to presume ‘any’
culpable mental state even beyond the culpable mental state ‘required for constituting
10 Dr. Pendhankar, PH, ‘Ferocious presumption under the POCSO Act’,
“Sub-section (2) to section 30 speaks about the extent of proof. Sub-section (2) states
that: “a fact is said to be proved only when the Special Court believes it to exist
beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a
preponderance of probability.” Thus, in order to rebut the presumption of guilt raised
against him, the accused must prove “beyond reasonable doubt” the fact that, he has
no required culpable mental state required in the offence charged against him. And if
he succeeds in proving this fact ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ then only the fact will be
said to be proved. Proving a fact on the basis of “preponderance of probability”, thus,
will not be sufficient; and this is expressly stated in the section itself. It means, if an
accused is charged for an offence, for example, under section 7, for touching certain
parts of a child’s body, the Court has to presume culpable mental state, i.e., ‘sexual
intention’ of the accused. But, if the accused takes a defence that he had no such
mental state, i.e., ‘sexual intention’ he has to prove this fact2 ‘beyond reasonable
doubt’. And if he succeeds in proving this fact ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ then only
the fact will be said to be proved. Proving a fact on the basis of “preponderance of
probability”, thus, will not be sufficient.”12
CRITIQUE ON SECTION 29 AND 30 OF POCSO ACT:
“The burden that is shifted on the accused to prove his innocence must meet the ‘test
of reasonableness and liberty’ enshrined under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
Those tests, inter alia, are: ‘foundational fact test’, i.e., presumption of guilt can be
drawn only when certain foundational facts are proved by the prosecution; ‘rational
connection test’, i.e., there must be a rational connection between the ‘foundational
fact proved’ and the ‘ultimate fact presumed’. Further, the burden resting on the
accused to prove his innocence should not be as onerous as that which lies on the
prosecution; meaning thereby, accused can discharge the burden that lies on him by
11 Dr. Pendhankar, PH, ‘Ferocious presumption under the POCSO Act’,
12 Dr. Pendhankar, PH, ‘Ferocious presumption under the POCSO Act’,
‘preponderance of probabilities’. Sections 29 and 30 of the POCSO Act, as stated
above, does not stand to either of these tests.13
Section 30 mandates the court to presume ‘culpable mental state’ of the accused on
the sole basis that, he/she is “charged” under any of the offence in the POCSO Act. It
does not to lay down any parameter of foundational facts to be proved by the
prosecution from which the court may lead to an inference in respect of guilt/mens
rea of the accused. Section 30, thus, disregards the well-established principle of law
that, ‘an inference of one fact can be drawn only when the prosecution has proved
COMPENSATION UNDER POCSO ACT:
Section 33(8) of POCSO Act deals with compensation to the child victims. The
section reads thus: (8) In appropriate cases, the Special Court may, in addition to the
punishment, direct payment of such compensation as may be prescribed to the child
for any physical or mental trauma caused to him or for immediate rehabilitation of
such child. Rule 7 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Rules, 2012
comprehensively deals with the compensation to the victim child under POCSO Act.
Rule 7 reads as under:
7. Compensation - (1) The Special Court may, in appropriate cases, on its own or on an application
filed by or on behalf of the child, pass an order for interim compensation to meet the immediate
needs of the child for relief or rehabilitation at any stage after registration of the First Information
Report. Such interim compensation paid to the child shall be adjusted against the final
(2)The Special Court may, on its own or on an application filed by or on behalf of the
victim,recommend the award of compensation where the accused is convicted, or where the case
ends in acquittal or discharge, or the accused is not traced or identified, and in the opinion of the
Special Court the child has suffered loss or injury as a result of that offence.
(3) Where the Special Court, under sub-section (8) of section 33 of the Act read with sub-sections
(2) and (3) of section 357A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, makes a direction for the award of
13 Dr. Pendhankar, PH, ‘Ferocious presumption under the POCSO Act’,
14 Dr. Pendhankar, PH, ‘Ferocious presumption under the POCSO Act’,
compensation to the victim, it shall take into account all relevant factors relating to the loss or
injury caused to the victim, including the following:-
(i) type of abuse, gravity of the offence and the severity of the mental or physical
harm or injury suffered by the child;
(ii) the expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred on his medical treatment for
physical and/or mental health;
(iii) loss of educational opportunity as a consequence of the offence, including
absence from school due to mental trauma, bodily injury, medical treatment,
investigation and trial of the offence, or any other reason;
(iv) loss of employment as a result of the offence, including absence from place of
employment due to mental trauma, bodily injury, medical treatment, investigation
and trial of the offence, or any other reason;
(v) the relationship of the child to the offender, if any;
(vi) whether the abuse was a single isolated incidence or whether the abuse took place over a
(vii) whether the child became pregnant as a result of the offence;
(viii) whether the child contracted a sexually transmitted disease (STD) as a result of
(ix) whether the child contracted human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) as a result of
(x) any disability suffered by the child as a result of the offence;
(xi) financial condition of the child against whom the offence has been committed so
as to determine his need for rehabilitation;
(xii) any other factor that the Special Court may consider to be relevant.
(4) The compensation awarded by the Special Court is to be paid by the State Government from the
Victims Compensation Fund or other scheme or fund established by it for the purposes of
compensating and rehabilitating victims under section 357A of the Code of Criminal Procedure or
any other laws for the time being in force, or, where such fund or scheme does not exist, by the State
(5) The State Government shall pay the compensation ordered by the Special Court within 30 days
of receipt of such order.
(6) Nothing in these rules shall prevent a child or his parent or guardian or any other person in
whom the child has trust and confidence from submitting an application for seeking relief under any
other rules or scheme of the Central Government or State Government.
The Hon’ble High Court of Calcutta in Bijoy @ Guddu Das vs. State of West Bengal
reported in (2017) 2 Cal LJ 22415 while dealing with award of compensation under
POCSO Act held that “Compensation envisaged under the aforesaid provision of law
may be awarded by the Special Court at the interim stage also for immediate relief
and rehabilitation of a child victim in light of the parameters laid down under Sub-
Rule (3) of Rule 7 of the aforesaid Rules. Such compensation payable by the State is
independent of the compensation which may be directed to be paid by the convict
upon conviction in terms of Section 357(2) and (3) of the Code. The philosophy of
awarding compensation by the State is in the nature of a reparation to the victim of
crime on its failure to discharge its sovereign duty to protect and preserve sanctity
and safety of the individual from the ravages of such crime”. The court also made
reference to Victim Compensation Fund notified by State Government under Section
357-A Cr.P.C.  prescribing  the  minimum  amount  of  compensation  that  may  be
awarded for various offences/injuries in the schedule thereunder which is as follows:
Schedule  Sl.  No.  Description  of  Injuries/Loss  Minimum  Amount  of
1. Acid Attack Rs.3 lakhs
2. Rape Rs.3 lakhs
3. Physical abuse of minor Rs.2 lakhs
4. Rehabilitation of victim of Human Rs.1 lakh Trafficking or other offences like witch
5. Sexual assault (Excluding rape) Rs.50,000/-
6. Death Rs.2 lakhs
7. Permanent Disability (80% or more) Rs.2 lakhs
8. Partial Disability (40% to 80%) Rs.1 lakh
9. Burns affecting greater than 25% of Rs.2 lakhs the body (excluding Acid Attack
10. Loss of foetus Rs.50,000/-
11. Loss of fertility Rs.1.5 lakhs Note: If the victim is less than 14 years of age, the
compensation shall be increased by 50% over the amount specified above.
Referring to the above, the Hon’ble Calcutta Court held that “ The aforesaid scheme is,
therefore, lays down the minimum limit for award of compensation in cases of offences relating to
rape, sexual assault (excluding rape), physical abuse of minor etc. It also provides for a hike of
50% of the amount of compensation if the victim is below 14 years of age. Although offences under
POCSO  are  not  specifically  mentioned  in  the  Schedule,  the  cognate  nature  of  offences  of
penetrative sexual assault or aggravated penetrative sexual assault punishable under Sections 4 &
6 of POCSO when compared with rape and that of sexual assault with sections 6 & 8 of POCSO,
prompts me to hold that the duty of the State to award compensation to victims under the aforesaid
Fund would extend to such offences also. The Special Court, therefore, while dealing with such
offences may make orders of interim or final compensation to victim from the Fund made available
by the State. It is further clarified that a conjoint reading of the Section 33(8) of the Act along with
Rule 7 of the Rules made it amply clear that the power of the Special Court to award interim/final
compensation is not restricted to the terms of the Victim Compensation Fund promulgated by the
State but empowers the Court to award such reasonable and just amount as may be determined by
it in the facts of the case in the light of the parameters laid down in Rule 7(3) of the aforesaid Rules
to provide succour to a child victim. Upon orders being passed by the Special Court relating to
such compensation the State Government shall pay the compensation so ordered by the Special
Court within 30 days of the receipt of the order by itself or through the State Legal Services
Authority or the District Legal Services Authority in whose hands the Victim Compensation Fund
may be entrusted. It is also made clear that it shall be open to the Special Court in appropriate
cases to grant compensation over and above the limit proposed under the scheme inasmuch as the
scheme merely lays down the minimum limits of such compensation and does not provide for a
upper limit which is left open to the judicial discretion of the Court to be determined in the light of
the parameters laid down in Rule 7(3) of the aforesaid Rules.”
SOME OTHER IMPORTANT FEATURES OF POCSO ACT:
Confidentiality of the victim’s identity: “Section 23 of the POCSO Act provides
for the procedure of media and imposes the duty to maintain the child victim’s
identity unless the Special Court has allowed the disclosure. Section 23(2) states, “no
reports in any media shall disclose the identity of a child including his name,
address,  photograph,  family  details,  school,  neighbourhood  and  any  other
particulars which may lead to the disclosure of the identity of the child”. In the
landmark case of Bijoy @ Guddu Das v. The State of West Bengal (cited supra), the
Calcutta High Court reiterated the law made under Section 23 and declared that any
person including a police officer shall be prosecuted if he/ she commits such a
Gender-neutral provisions: “Another glaring feature of the POCSO Act is that it
does not create any distinction between the victim or the perpetrators on the basis of
their gender. This overcomes one of the biggest shortcomings of the Indian Penal
Code’s provisions. The definition of child includes anyone below 18 years of age and
in several cases, the courts have even convicted women for engaging in child sexual
Mandatory reporting of child abuse cases: “Sexual abuse cases happen behind
closed doors and the elders attempt to hide these incidents due to the stigma that is
attached to these crimes. Consequently, for the proper implementation of the POCSO
Act, reporting of these incidents by the third parties who have the knowledge or
apprehension of such offences, has been made mandatory under Sections 19 to 22 of
the POCSO Act. These laws have been made on the basis of assumptions that
children are vulnerable and helpless and society has the duty to protect the interests
SKIN TO SKIN CONTACT CASE:
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in  Attorney General Of India vs. Satish & Others
reported in 2021 SCC Online SC 42, had set aside the judgement passed by Bombay
High Court which held that skin to skin contact is necessary to punish the offender
for sexual assault under Section 8 of the POCSO Act. The Supreme Court held that
the most important ingredient to constitute the offence of sexual assault under Section
7 of the Act would be the “sexual intent” and not the “skin to skin” contact with the
child and any narrow interpretation of the provision which would defeat the object of
the provision would not be accepted.19
SHORTCOMINGS OF POCSO ACT:
PROBLEM WITH LAST SEEN THEORY:
The last seen theory can lead to wrongful conviction in several cases and therefore, it
cannot  be applied without circumstantial evidence. It  was held by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of Anjan Kumar Sarma v. State of Assam reported in
(2017) 14 SCC 359, that the last seen theory is a weak piece of evidence and cannot
be relied upon single-handedly.20
SILENT ON CONSENSUAL SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
In case of sexual intercourse with consent, one of which is minor, the partner who is
not minor can be prosecuted under the POCSO Act as the consent of a minor is not
considered relevant under this Act.21
FALSE COMPLAINTS BY CHILDREN ARE NOT PUNISHABLE:
Section 22 of the POCSO Act provides for the punishment to the persons who file a
false complaint in order to humiliate, extort, threaten or defame another person.
However, a child is exempted from any such punishment which is a loophole as many
people take advantage of this exemption and misuse this provision.22
India had no legislation until 2012 to address the evil offences committed
against male and female children. POCSO Act being a gender neutral legislation aims
to provide safety to children and punish the offenders based on gravity of offences
committed against children and addresses all aspects of child sexual abuse. The Act
was amended in the year 2019 making punishments under the Act more stringent.
Sensitization of public regarding child sexual abuse and POCSO Act is very essential
in view of low rate of reporting of crimes under the Act. Child sexual abuse is a
multidimensional problem with medical, social, psychological and legal implications.
Child sexual abuse cases seldom present with definite symptoms of genital trauma.
As a result, evaluating a victim of child sexual abuse involves specialized knowledge
and methods in history collection, forensic interrogation, and medical examination.
Involvement of a mental health expert is necessary during investigation and trial
stage to mitigate and address the adverse effects of child sexual abuse on victim